10-K 1 bmi-20131231x10k.htm 10-K

  

  
  
  
---  
  
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Washington, D.C. 20549

FORM 10-K

Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934

for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013

BADGER METER, INC.

4545 W. Brown Deer Road

Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53223

(414) 355-0400

A Wisconsin Corporation

IRS Employer Identification No. 39-0143280

Commission File No. 001-06706

  

The Company has the following classes of securities registered pursuant to
Section 12(b) of the Act:  
  
---  
| |  
  
Title of class:

|

|

Name of each exchange

on which registered:  
  
Common Stock

|

|

New York Stock Exchange  
  
Common Share Purchase Rights

|

|

New York Stock Exchange  
  
  

The Company does not have any securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g)
of the Act.

  

Indicate by check mark if the Company is a well-known seasoned issuer, as
defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ¨ No ý

  

Indicate by check mark if the Company is not required to file reports pursuant
to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act. Yes ¨ No ý

  

Indicate by check mark whether the Company (1) has filed all reports required
to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Company
was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ý No ¨

  

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and
posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required
to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to submit and post such files).  Yes ý No ¨

  

Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405
of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the
best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to
this Form 10-K. ý

  

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company.
See definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer," "non-
accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act: (Check one).  
  
---  
| | | |  
  
Large accelerated filer

|

¨

|

|

Accelerated filer

|

ý  
  
Non-accelerated filer

|

¨

|

|

Smaller reporting company

|

¨  
  
  

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined
in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes ¨ No ý

  

The aggregate market value of the Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the
Company as of June 28, 2013 was $613,399,995. For purposes of this calculation
only, (i) shares of Common Stock are deemed to have a market value of $44.55
per share, the closing price of the Common Stock as reported on the New York
Stock Exchange on June 28, 2013, and (ii) each of the Company's executive
officers and directors is deemed to be an affiliate of the Company.

  

As of February 6, 2014, there were 14,406,540 shares of Common Stock
outstanding with a par value of $1 per share.

  

Portions of the Company's Proxy Statement for the 2014 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, which will be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
under Regulation 14A within 120 days after the end of the registrant's fiscal
year, are incorporated by reference from the definitive Proxy Statement into
Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

  

  

* * *

  

  

Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements

  

Certain statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as
other information provided from time to time by Badger Meter, Inc. (the
"Company") or its employees, may contain forward looking statements that
involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those in the forward looking statements. The words
"anticipate," "believe," "estimate," "expect," "think," "should," "could" and
"objective" or similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking
statements. All such forward looking statements are based on the Company's
then current views and assumptions and involve risks and uncertainties. Some
risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially
from those expressed or implied in forward looking statements include those
described in Item 1A of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2013 that include, among other things:

  

|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the continued shift in the Company's business from lower cost, manually read
meters toward more expensive, value-added automatic meter reading (AMR)
systems, advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) systems and advanced metering
analytics (AMA) systems that offer more comprehensive solutions to customers'
metering needs;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the success or failure of newer Company products;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

changes in competitive pricing and bids in both the domestic and foreign
marketplaces, and particularly in continued intense price competition on
government bid contracts for lower cost, manually read meters;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the actions (or lack thereof) of the Company's competitors;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

changes in the Company's relationships with its alliance partners, primarily
its alliance partners that provide radio solutions, and particularly those
that sell products that do or may compete with the Company's products;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

changes in the general health of the United States and foreign economies,
including to some extent such things as the length and severity of global
economic downturns, the ability of municipal water utility customers to
authorize and finance purchases of the Company's products, the Company's
ability to obtain financing, housing starts in the United States, and overall
industrial activity;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

unusual weather and other natural phenomena, including related economic and
other ancillary effects of any such events;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the timing and impact of government programs to stimulate national and global
economies, as well as the impact of government budget cuts or partial
shutdowns of governmental operations;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

changes in the cost and/or availability of needed raw materials and parts,
such as volatility in the cost of brass castings as a result of fluctuations
in commodity prices, particularly for copper and scrap metal at the supplier
level, foreign-sourced electronic components as a result of currency exchange
fluctuations and/or lead times, and plastic resin as a result of changes in
petroleum and natural gas prices;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the Company's expanded role as a prime contractor for providing complete
connectivity systems to governmental entities, which brings with it added
risks, including but not limited to, the Company's responsibility for
subcontractor performance, additional costs and expenses if the Company and
its subcontractors fail to meet the timetable agreed to with the governmental
entity, and the Company's expanded warranty and performance obligations;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the Company's ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses or
products;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

changes in foreign economic conditions, particularly currency fluctuations in
the United States dollar, the Euro and the Mexican peso;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the failure of the Company's technology products to operate as intended;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the inability to protect the Company's proprietary rights to its software and
related products;  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

the loss of certain single-source suppliers; and  
  
|  
---|---  
  
•

|

changes in laws and regulations, particularly laws dealing with the use of
lead (which can be used in the manufacture of certain meters incorporating
brass housings) and the United States Federal Communications Commission rules
affecting the use and/or licensing of radio frequencies necessary for radio
products.  
  
  

All of these factors are beyond the Company's control to varying degrees.
Shareholders, potential investors and other readers are urged to consider
these factors carefully in evaluating the forward looking statements contained
in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and are cautioned not to place undue
reliance on such forward looking statements. The forward looking statements
made in this document are made only as of the date of this document and the
Company assumes no obligation, and disclaims any obligation, to update any
such forward looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances.

  

  

1

* * *

  

  

PART I

  

  

ITEM 1. BUSINESS

  

Badger Meter, Inc. (the "Company") is a leading innovator, manufacturer and
marketer of products incorporating flow measurement and control technologies
serving markets worldwide. The Company was incorporated in 1905.

  

Throughout this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K, the words "we", "us" and
"our" refer to the Company.

  

Available Information

  

The Company's Internet address is http://www.badgermeter.com. The Company
makes available free of charge (other than an investor's own Internet access
charges) through its Internet website its Annual Report on Form 10-K,
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to
those reports, on the same day they are electronically filed with, or
furnished to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Company is not
including the information contained on or available through its website as a
part of, or incorporating such information by reference into, this Annual
Report on Form 10-K.

  

Market Overview, Products, Systems and Solutions

  

An innovator in flow measurement and control products, the Company serves
water utilities, municipalities, and commercial and industrial customers
worldwide. Measuring water, oil, chemicals and other fluids, the Company's
products are known for accuracy, long-lasting durability and for providing
valuable and timely measurement data. The Company's product lines fall into
three categories: sales of water meters and related technologies to municipal
water utilities (municipal water), sales of meters to various industries for
water and other fluids (industrial flow), and sales of gas meter radios and
concrete vibrators to unique markets (specialty products). The Company
estimates that over 75% of its products are used in water applications when
all categories are grouped together.

  

Municipal water, the largest category by sales volume, includes mechanical and
electronic (static) water meters and related technologies and services used by
water utilities as the basis for generating water and wastewater revenues. The
key market for the Company's water meter products is North America, primarily
the United States, because most meters are designed and manufactured to
conform to standards promulgated by the American Water Works Association.
Sales of water meters and related technologies and services are commonly
referred to as residential or commercial water meter sales, the latter
referring to larger sizes of meters.

  

Industrial flow includes products sold worldwide to measure and control
materials flowing through a pipe or pipeline including water, air, steam, oil,
and other liquids and gases. These meters and valves are used in a variety of
applications, such as water/wastewater; heating, ventilating and air
conditioning (HVAC); oil and gas; chemical and petrochemical; food and
beverage; and pharmaceutical production.

  

Specialty products include sales of radio technology to natural gas utilities
for installation on their gas meters, and concrete vibrators.

  

Residential and commercial water meters are generally classified as either
manually read meters or remotely read meters via radio technology. A manually
read meter consists of a water meter and a register that gives a visual meter
reading display. Meters equipped with radio transmitters (endpoints) use
encoder registers to convert the measurement data from the meter into an
encrypted digital format which is then transmitted via radio frequency to a
receiver that collects and formats the data appropriately for water utility
billing systems. Mobile systems, referred to as automatic meter reading (AMR)
systems, have been the primary technology deployed by water utilities over the
past two decades, providing accurate and cost-effective billing data. In an
AMR system, a vehicle equipped for meter reading purposes, including a radio
receiver, computer and reading software, collects the data from utilities'
meters.

  

Fixed network advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) systems continue to build
interest among water utilities. These systems incorporate a network of
permanent data collectors or gateway receivers that are always active or
listening for the radio transmission from the utilities' meters. AMI systems
eliminate the need for utility personnel to drive through service territories
to collect meter reading data. These systems provide the utilities with more
frequent and diverse data from the utilities' meters at specified intervals.

  

  

2

* * *

  

  

In 2011, the Company introduced what it believes is the next generation of
metering technology, advanced metering analytics (AMA), along with a host of
automated utility management tools to facilitate the ability of water and gas
utilities to increase their productivity and revenue, as well as proactively
utilize their data. AMA is comprised of ReadCenter® Analytics software coupled
with ORION® SE two-way fixed network or GALAXY® one-way fixed network
technology, which is complemented by a family of highly accurate and reliable
water meters.

The ORION SE system can operate in either a mobile or fixed network mode
depending on the deployment needs of the utility. For example, a water or gas
utility can begin deployment in mobile mode and transition to a fixed network
system without visiting the endpoint. Once deployed, if the system is
operating in fixed network mode and the gateway data collector stops
functioning, the endpoint will continue to send data that can be captured by a
mobile system. Once the gateway data collector functions again, the utility
will again receive data through the fixed network system.

  

In January 2014, the Company launched its new BEACON AMA system. BEACON AMA
combines the BEACON analytical software suite with proven ORION AMI technology
using fixed and cellular networks in a managed solution, improving utilities'
visibility of their water consumption and reducing the need for costly
infrastructure. With the release of BEACON AMA, Badger Meter also became the
first major worldwide water meter company to release a cost-effective
cellular-based solution for system wide deployment. BEACON AMA enables two-way
communication between the water meter and the meter reading system.

  

The BEACON AMA secure, hosted software suite includes a customizable
dashboard, the ability to establish alerts for specific conditions, and
consumer engagement tools that allow end water customers to view and manage
their water usage activity. Benefits to the utility include faster leak
detection, easier revenue management, the ability to quantify the effects of
its water conservation efforts, easier compliance reporting, and improved
customer service.

  

The Company's net sales and corresponding net earnings depend on unit volume
and product mix, with the Company generally earning higher margins on meters
equipped with radio technology. In addition to selling its proprietary radio
products, including the ORION radio technologies and GALAXY AMI/AMA system,
the Company also remarkets the Itron® radio products under a license and
distribution agreement with Itron. The Company's proprietary radio products
generally result in higher margins than the remarketed, non-proprietary
technology products. The Company also sells registers and endpoints separately
to customers who wish to upgrade their existing meters in the field.

  

The proprietary ORION endpoint technology has been licensed to other
technology providers on a non-exclusive basis, including those providing radio
products that communicate over power lines, broadband networks, and
proprietary radio frequency networks, allowing ORION a distinct advantage in
the radio solutions market. In addition, the ORION universal gateway receiver
transmits data over a variety of public wireless networks, which allows for
strategic deployments, such as monitoring large commercial users.

  

Water meter replacement and the adoption and deployment of new technology
comprise the majority of water meter product sales, including radio products.
To a much lesser extent, housing starts also contribute to the new product
sales base. Over the last decade, there has been a growing trend in the
conversion from manually read water meters to radio technology. This
conversion rate is accelerating and contributes to an increased water meter
and radio solutions base of business. The Company estimates that less than 35%
of water meters installed in the United States have been converted to a radio
solutions technology. The Company's strategy is to fulfill customers' metering
expectations and requirements with its proprietary meter reading systems or
other systems available through its alliance partners in the marketplace.

  

Industrial flow and specialty products serve flow measurement and control
applications across a broad industrial spectrum. Specialized communication
protocols that control the entire flow measurement process drive these
markets. The Company's specific flow measurement and control applications and
technologies serve the flow measurement market through both customized and
standard precision flow measurement technologies.

The Company's products are primarily manufactured and assembled in the
Company's Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Racine, Wisconsin; Tulsa, Oklahoma;
Scottsdale, Arizona; Nogales, Mexico; Neuffen, Germany; Brno, Czech Republic;
and Bern, Switzerland facilities.

The Company's products are sold throughout the world through employees,
resellers and representatives. Depending on the customer mix, there can be a
moderate seasonal impact on sales, primarily relating to higher sales of
certain municipal water products during the spring and summer months. No
single customer accounts for more than 10% of the Company's sales.

  

  

  

3

* * *

  

  

Competition

There are competitors in each category in which the Company sells its
products, and the competition varies from moderate to intense. Major
competitors for utility water meters include Sensus USA Inc., Neptune
Technology Group, Inc., Master Meter, Inc. and Mueller Water Products, Inc.
Together with Badger Meter, it is estimated these companies sell in excess of
90% of the meters in the North American market, which has been insulated from
other competitors due to the nature of the mechanical technology used and the
standards promulgated by the American Water Works Assocation. The Company, as
well as some of its competitors, have introduced various forms of static
meters (no moving parts) in recent years and have seen sales of those products
begin to grow. As the global water metering market begins to adopt electronic
(static) technology, Kamstrup Water Metering, Diehl Metering and Itron, Inc.
are also potential competitors.

  

The Company's primary competitors for water utility radio products are Itron,
Inc., Neptune Technology Group, Inc. and Sensus USA Inc. While the Company
sells its own proprietary radio systems (ORION and GALAXY), it is also a
reseller of the Itron products. A number of the Company's competitors in
certain markets have greater financial resources than the Company. However,
the Company believes it currently provides the leading technology in water
meters and radio water systems. As a result of significant research and
development activities, the Company enjoys favorable patent positions and
trade secret protections for several of its technologies and products.

There are many competitors in the industrial flow and specialty products
markets due to the various markets and applications being served. For example,
major competitors in the industrial flow markets include Emerson Electric
Company, Krohne Messtechnik GmbH, Endress &amp; Hauser Management AG, and
Yokogawa Electric Corporation. In the HVAC market, the key competitor is
Onicon Inc. In upstream oil and gas, Cameron International Corporation is the
primary competitor. The Company competes with AW-Lake Company in the
measurement of on-machine hydraulic fluids. With the acquisition of Racine
Federated, Inc. in January 2012, the Company has a large portfolio of metering
technologies to compete in these markets.

  

Backlog

The Company's total backlog of unshipped orders at December 31, 2013 and 2012
was $31.7 million and $34.8 million, respectively. The backlog is comprised of
firm orders and signed contractual commitments, or portions of such
commitments that call for shipment within 12 months. Backlog can be
significantly affected by the timing of orders for large projects and the
amounts can vary due to the timing of work performed.

  

Raw Materials

Raw materials used in the manufacture of the Company's products include
purchased castings made of metal or alloys (such as brass, which uses copper
as its main component, aluminum, stainless steel and cast iron), plastic
resins, glass, microprocessors and other electronic subassemblies and
components. There are multiple sources for these raw materials, but the
Company relies on single suppliers for certain brass castings and certain
electronic subassemblies. The Company believes these items would be available
from other sources, but that the loss of certain suppliers would result in a
higher cost of materials, delivery delays, short-term increases in inventory
and higher quality control costs in the short term. The Company carries
business interruption insurance on key suppliers. The Company's purchases of
raw materials are based on production schedules, and as a result, inventory on
hand is generally not exposed to price fluctuations. World commodity markets
and currency exchange rates may also affect the prices of material purchased
in the future. The Company does not hold significant amounts of precious
metals.

  

Research and Development

Expenditures for research and development activities relating to the
development of new products, the improvement of existing products and
manufacturing process improvements were $10.5 million in 2013 compared to $9.6
million in 2012 and $8.1 million in 2011. Research and development activities
are primarily sponsored by the Company. The Company also engages in some joint
research and development with other companies.

  

Intangible Assets

The Company owns or controls several trade secrets and many patents,
trademarks and trade names in the United States and other countries that
relate to its products and technologies. No single patent, trademark, trade
name or trade secret is material to the Company's business as a whole.

  

  

  

4

* * *

  

  

Environmental Protection

The Company is subject to contingencies related to environmental laws and
regulations. The Company is named as one of many potentially responsible
parties in two landfill lawsuits. The landfill sites are impacted by the
Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
and other environmental laws and regulations. At this time, the Company does
not believe the ultimate resolution of these matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations,
either from a cash flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.
This belief is based on the Company's assessment of its limited past
involvement with these landfill sites as well as the substantial involvement
of and government focus on other named third parties with these landfill
sites. However, due to the inherent uncertainties of such proceedings, the
Company cannot predict the ultimate outcome of any of these matters. A future
change in circumstances with respect to these specific matters or with respect
to sites formerly or currently owned or operated by the Company, off-site
disposal locations used by the Company, and property owned by third parties
that is near such sites, could result in future costs to the Company and such
amounts could be material. Expenditures for compliance with environmental
control provisions and regulations during 2013, 2012 and 2011 were not
material.

  

Employees

The Company and its subsidiaries employed 1,360 persons at December 31, 2013,
122 of whom are covered by a collective bargaining agreement with District 10
of the International Association of Machinists. The Company is currently
operating under a five-year contract with the union, which expires on October
31, 2016. The Company believes it has good relations with the union and all of
its employees.

The following table sets forth certain information regarding the Executive
Officers of the Registrant.  
  
---  
| |  
  
Name

|

Position

|

Age at

2/28/2014  
  
Richard A. Meeusen

|

Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer

|

59  
  
Richard E. Johnson

|

Senior Vice President -- Finance, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer

|

59  
  
Fred J. Begale

|

Vice President -- Engineering

|

49  
  
William R. A. Bergum

|

Vice President -- General Counsel and Secretary

|

49  
  
Gregory M. Gomez

|

Vice President -- Business Development

|

49  
  
Horst E. Gras

|

Vice President -- International Operations

|

58  
  
Raymond G. Serdynski

|

Vice President -- Manufacturing

|

57  
  
Beverly L. P. Smiley

|

Vice President -- Controller

|

64  
  
Kimberly K. Stoll

|

Vice President -- Sales and Marketing

|

47  
  
  

There are no family relationships between any of the executive officers.
Officers are elected annually at the first meeting of the Board of Directors
held after each annual meeting of the shareholders. Each officer holds office
until his or her successor has been elected or until his or her death,
resignation or removal. There is no arrangement or understanding between any
executive officer and any other person pursuant to which he or she was elected
as an officer.

Mr. Meeusen has served as Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer for
more than five years.

Mr. Johnson has served as Senior Vice President - Finance, Chief Financial
Officer and Treasurer for more than five years.

Mr. Begale was elected Vice President - Engineering in December 2010. Mr.
Begale served as Vice President - Business Development from April 2009 to
December 2010, and Director - Business Development from March 2007 to April
2009.

Mr. Bergum has served as Vice President - General Counsel and Secretary for
more than five years.

  

Mr. Gomez was elected Vice President - Business Development in December 2010,
and served as Vice President - Engineering from February 2008 to December
2010.

  

Mr. Gras has served as Vice President - International Operations for more than
five years.

  

Mr. Serdynski has served as Vice President - Manufacturing for more than five
years.

  

5

* * *

  

  

Ms. Smiley has served as Vice President - Controller for more than five years.

Ms. Stoll was elected Vice President - Sales and Marketing in February 2012.
Ms. Stoll served as Vice President - Marketing from April 2009 to February
2012, and served as Director - Utility Marketing from August 2008 to April
2009.

  

Foreign Operations and Export Sales

The Company distributes its products through employees, resellers and
representatives throughout the world. Additionally, the Company has a sales,
distribution and manufacturing facility in Neuffen, Germany; sales and
customer service offices in Mexico, Singapore, China and Slovakia;
manufacturing facilities in Nogales, Mexico; and manufacturing and sales
facilities in Brno, Czech Republic and Bern, Switzerland. The Company exports
products from the United States that are manufactured in Milwaukee, Wisconsin;
Racine, Wisconsin; Tulsa, Oklahoma; and Scottsdale, Arizona.

Information about the Company's foreign operations and export sales is
included in Note 10 "Industry Segment and Geographic Areas" in the Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013 Annual
Report on Form 10-K.

  

Financial Information about Industry Segments

  

The Company operates in one industry segment as an innovator, manufacturer and
marketer of products incorporating flow measurement and control technologies
as described in Note 10 "Industry Segment and Geographic Areas" in the Notes
to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013 Annual
Report on Form 10-K.

  

ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS

  

Shareholders, potential investors and other readers are urged to consider the
significant business risks described below in addition to the other
information set forth or incorporated by reference in this 2013 Annual Report
on Form 10-K, including the "Special Note Regarding Forward Looking
Statements" at the front of this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K. If any of
the events contemplated by the following risks actually occur, our financial
condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected. The
following list of risk factors may not be exhaustive. We operate in a
continually changing business, economic and geopolitical environment, and new
risk factors may emerge from time to time. We can neither predict these new
risk factors with certainty nor assess the precise impact, if any, on our
business, or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may
adversely impact our results of operations. While there is much uncertainty,
we do analyze the risks we face, perform a probability assessment of their
impacts and attempt to soften their potential impact when and if possible.

  

Competitive pressures in the marketplace could decrease our revenues and
profits.

  

Competitive pressures in the marketplace for our products could adversely
affect our competitive position, leading to a possible loss of market share or
a decrease in prices, either of which could result in decreased revenues and
profits. We operate in an environment where competition varies from moderate
to intense and a number of our competitors have greater financial resources.
Our competitors also include alliance partners that sell products that do or
may compete with our products, particularly those that provide radio
solutions. The principal elements of competition for our most significant
product applications, residential and commercial water meters for the
municipal water utility market (with various radio technology systems), are
price, product technology, quality and service. The competitive environment is
also affected by the movement toward radio technologies and away from manually
read meters, the demand for replacement units and, to some extent, such things
as global economic conditions, the timing and size of governmental programs
such as stimulus fund programs, the ability of municipal water utility
customers to authorize and finance purchases of our products, our ability to
obtain financing, housing starts in the United States, and overall economic
activity. For our industrial flow and specialty products, the competitive
environment is affected by the general economic health of various industrial
sectors particularly in the United States and Europe.

The inability to develop technologically advanced products could harm our
future success.

  

We believe that our future success depends, in part, on our ability to develop
technologically advanced products that meet or exceed appropriate industry
standards. Although we believe that we currently have a competitive advantage
in this area, maintaining such advantage will require continued investment in
research and development, sales, marketing and manufacturing capabilities.
There can be no assurance that we will have sufficient resources to make such
investments or that we will be able to make the technological advances
necessary to maintain such competitive advantage. If we are unable to maintain
our competitive advantage, our future financial performance may be adversely
affected. We are not currently aware

  

6

* * *

  

  

of any emerging standards or new products that could render our existing
products obsolete in the near term. The water utility industry is beginning to
see the adoption of electronic (static) water meters. Electronic water
metering has lower barriers to entry that could affect the competitive
landscape in North America. We believe we have a competitive product if the
adoption rate for electronic meters were to accelerate.

  

The inability to obtain adequate supplies of raw materials and component parts
at favorable prices could decrease our profit margins and negatively impact
timely delivery to customers.

We are affected by the availability and prices for raw materials, including
purchased castings made of metal or alloys (such as brass, which uses copper
as its main component, aluminum, stainless steel and cast iron), plastic
resins, glass, microprocessors and other electronic subassemblies, and
components that are used in the manufacturing process. The inability to obtain
adequate supplies of raw materials and component parts for our products at
favorable prices could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition or results of operations by decreasing profit margins and
by negatively impacting timely deliveries to customers. In the past, we have
been able to offset increases in raw materials and component parts by
increased sales prices, active materials management, product engineering
programs and the diversity of materials used in the production processes.
However, we cannot be certain that we will be able to accomplish this in the
future. Since we do not control the actual production of these raw materials
and component parts, there may be delays caused by an interruption in the
production of these materials for reasons that are beyond our control. World
commodity markets and inflation may also affect raw material and component
part prices.

  

New regulations related to conflict minerals may force us to incur additional
expenses.

  

The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted disclosure requirements
related to certain minerals sourced from the Democratic Republic of Congo and
surrounding countries, or "conflict minerals," that are necessary to the
functionality of a product manufactured, or contracted to be manufactured, by
a Securities and Exchange Commission reporting company. The minerals that the
final rules cover are commonly referred to as "3TG" and include tin, tantalum,
tungsten and gold. Implementation of the new disclosure requirements could
affect the sourcing and availability of some of the materials that we use in
the manufacture of our products. Our supply chain is complex, and if we are
not able to determine the origins for all conflict minerals used in our
products or that our products are "conflict free," then we may face
reputational challenges with customers or investors. We could also incur
significant costs related to the compliance process, including potential
difficulty or added costs in satisfying the disclosure and audit requirements.

  

Economic conditions could cause a material adverse impact on our sales and
operating results.

  

As a supplier of products, the majority of which are to water utilities, we
may be adversely affected by global economic conditions, delays in
governmental programs created to stimulate the economy, and the impact of
government budget cuts or partial shutdowns of governmental operations that
affect our customers, including independent distributors, large city
utilities, private water companies and numerous smaller municipal water
utilities. These customers may delay capital projects, including non-critical
maintenance and upgrades, or may not have the ability to authorize and finance
purchases during economic downturns or instability in world markets. We also
sell products for other applications to reduce our dependency on the municipal
water market. A significant downturn in this market could cause a material
adverse impact on sales and operating results. Therefore, a downturn in
general economic conditions, as well as in the municipal water market, and
delays in the timing or amounts of possible economic stimulus fund programs,
government budget cuts or partial shutdowns of governmental operations, or the
availability of funds to municipalities could result in a reduction in demand
for our products and services and could harm the business.

  

Unusual weather and other natural phenomena could adversely affect our
business.

  

Our sales may be adversely affected by unusual weather and natural phenomena
that could have an impact on the timing of orders in given periods, depending
on the particular mix of customers being served by us at the time.

  

Failure to manufacture quality products could have a material adverse effect
on our business.

  

If we fail to maintain and enforce quality control and testing procedures, our
products will not meet required performance standards. Product quality and
performance are a priority for us since our products are used in various
applications where precise control of fluids is essential. Although we believe
we have a very good reputation for product quality, any future production
and/or sale of substandard products would seriously harm our reputation,
resulting in both a loss of current customers to competitors and damage to our
ability to attract new customers. In addition, if any of our products prove to
be defective, we may be required to participate in a recall involving such
products. A successful claim brought against

  

7

* * *

  

  

us with respect to a defective product in excess of available insurance
coverage, if any, or a requirement to participate in a major product recall,
could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or
financial condition.

  

Litigation against us could be costly, time consuming to defend and could
adversely affect our profitability.

  

From time to time, we are subject to legal proceedings and claims that arise
in the ordinary course of business. For example, we may be subject to workers'
compensation claims, employment/labor disputes, customer and supplier
disputes, product liability claims, intellectual property disputes and
contractual disputes related to warranties arising out of the conduct of our
business. Litigation may result in substantial costs and may divert
management's attention and resources, which could adversely affect our
profitability or financial condition.

  

If our technology products do not operate as intended, our business could be
materially and adversely affected.

We sell and install software products that may contain unexpected design
defects or may encounter unexpected complications during installation or when
used with other technologies utilized by the customer. A failure of our
technology products to operate as intended and in a seamless fashion with
other products could materially and adversely affect our results of
operations, financial position and cash flows.

  

If we are not able to protect our proprietary rights to our software and
related products, our ability to market our software products could be
hindered and our results of operations, financial position and cash flows
could be materially and adversely affected.

We rely on our agreements with customers, confidentiality agreements with
employees, and our trademarks, trade secrets, copyrights and patents to
protect our proprietary rights. These legal protections and precautions may
not prevent misappropriation of our proprietary information. In addition,
substantial litigation regarding intellectual property rights exists in the
software industry, and software products may increasingly be subject to third-
party infringement claims. Such litigation and misappropriation of our
proprietary information could hinder our ability to market and sell products
and services and our results of operations, financial position and cash flows
could be materially and adversely affected.

  

Changes in environmental or regulatory requirements could entail additional
expenses that could decrease our profitability.

  

We cannot predict the nature, scope or effect of future environmental or
regulatory requirements to which our operations might be subject or the manner
in which existing or future laws will be administered or interpreted.
Compliance with such laws or regulations may entail additional expenses that
could decrease profitability. We are subject to a variety of environmental
laws, such as lead content in certain meters incorporating brass housings, and
regulatory laws affecting the use and/or licensing of radio frequencies
necessary for radio products, as well as regulations related to customs and
trade practices. Currently, the cost of complying with existing laws is
included as part of our on-going expenses and does not have a material effect
on our business or financial position, but a change in the future could
adversely affect our profitability.

  

Risks related to foreign markets could decrease our profitability.

  

Since we sell products worldwide as well as manufacture products in several
countries, we are subject to risks associated with doing business
internationally. These risks include such things as changes in foreign
currency exchange rates, changes in a specific country's or region's political
or economic conditions, potentially negative consequences from changes in tax
laws or regulatory requirements, differing labor regulations, and the
difficulty of managing widespread operations.

  

An inability to attract and retain skilled employees could negatively impact
our growth and decrease our profitability.

  

Our success depends on our continued ability to identify, attract, develop and
retain skilled personnel throughout our organization. Current and future
compensation arrangements, including benefits, may not be sufficient to
attract new employees or retain existing employees, which may hinder our
growth.

  

Rising healthcare and retirement benefit costs could increase cost pressures
and decrease our profitability.

  

We estimate liabilities and expenses for retirement plans and other
postretirement benefits that require the use of assumptions relating to the
rates used to discount the future estimated liability, rate of return on any
assets and various assumptions related to the age and cost of the workforce.
Actual results may differ from the estimates and have a material

  

8

* * *

  

  

adverse effect on future results of operations or on the financial statements
as a whole. Rising healthcare and retirement benefit costs in the United
States may also add to cost pressures and decrease our profitability.

  

A failure to maintain good corporate governance practices could damage our
reputation and adversely affect our future success.

  

We have a history of good corporate governance, including procedures and
processes that are required by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and related
rules and regulations, such as board committee charters, and a code of
business conduct that defines how employees interact with our various
stakeholders and addresses issues such as confidentiality, conflict of
interest and fair dealing, and applicable exchange listing standards. Failure
to maintain these corporate governance practices could harm our reputation and
have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations.

  

Failure to successfully integrate acquired businesses or products could
adversely affect our operations.

  

As part of our business strategy, we continue to evaluate and may pursue
selected business or product acquisition opportunities that we believe may
provide us with certain operating and financial benefits. If we complete any
such acquisitions, they may require integration into our existing business
with respect to administrative, financial, sales, marketing, manufacturing and
other functions to realize these anticipated benefits. If we are unable to
successfully integrate a business or product acquisition, we may not realize
the benefits identified in our due diligence process, and our financial
results may be negatively impacted. Additionally, significant unexpected
liabilities may arise during or after completion of an acquisition.

  

ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS

  

None.

  

ITEM 2. PROPERTIES

  

The principal facilities utilized by the Company at December 31, 2013 are
listed below. The Company owns all such facilities in fee simple except as
noted. The Company believes that its facilities are generally well maintained
and have sufficient capacity for its current needs.  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

|

|

|

Approximate area

|  
  
Location

|

|

Principal use

|

|

(square feet)

|  
  
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

323,500

|

  

|  
  
Racine, Wisconsin, USA

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

134,000

|

  

|

(1

|

)  
  
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

23,000

|

  

|

(2

|

)  
  
Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

59,500

|

  

|  
  
Brno, Czech Republic

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

27,800

|

  

|  
  
Neuffen, Germany

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

21,500

|

  

|  
  
Nogales, Mexico

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

140,000

|

  

|  
  
Nogales, Mexico

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

41,300

|

  

|  
  
Bern, Switzerland

|

|

Manufacturing and offices

|

|

1,100

|

  

|

(3

|

)  
  
|  
---|---  
  
(1)

|

Leased facility. Lease term expires December 31, 2025.  
  
(2) Leased facility. Lease term expires June 30, 2014, at which time it is
expected to be renewed.

(3) Building is owned, but land is leased from the government. Lease term
expires October 18, 2021.

  

ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

  

In the normal course of business, the Company is named in legal proceedings
from time to time. There are currently no material legal proceedings pending
with respect to the Company. The more significant legal proceedings are
discussed below.

  

Like other companies in recent years, the Company is named as a defendant in
numerous pending multi-claimant/multi-defendant lawsuits alleging personal
injury as a result of exposure to asbestos, manufactured by third parties, and
integrated into or sold with a very limited number of the Company's products.
The Company is vigorously defending itself against these claims. Although it
is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters, the Company
does not believe

  

9

* * *

  

  

the ultimate resolution of these issues will have a material adverse effect on
the Company's financial position or results of operations, either from a cash
flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole. This belief is
based in part on the fact that no claimant has proven or substantially
demonstrated asbestos exposure caused by products manufactured or sold by the
Company and that a number of cases have been voluntarily dismissed.

  

The Company is subject to contingencies related to environmental laws and
regulations. Information about the Company's compliance with environmental
regulations is included in Part I, Item 1 of this 2013 Annual Report on Form
10-K under the heading "Environmental Protection."

  

ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES

  

Not applicable.

  

  

10

* * *

  

  

PART II

  

  

ITEM 5. MARKET FOR THE REGISTRANT'S COMMON STOCK, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES

  

Information required by this Item is set forth in Note 11 "Unaudited:
Quarterly Results of Operations, Common Stock Price and Dividends" in the
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013
Annual Report on Form 10-K.

  

The following information in Item 5 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is not
deemed to be "soliciting material" or to be "filed" with the Securities and
Exchange Commission or subject to Regulation 14A or 14C under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 or to the liabilities of Section 18 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, and will not be deemed to be incorporated by reference
into any filing under the Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, except to the extent the Company specifically incorporates it by
reference into such a filing.

  

The following graph compares on a cumulative basis the yearly percentage
change since January 1, 2009 in (a) the total shareholder return on the Common
Stock with (b) the total return on the Russell 2000 Index, and (c) the total
return of the peer group made up of 15 companies in similar industries and
with similar market capitalization.

  

The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31, 2008. It further assumes the
reinvestment of dividends. The returns of each component company in the peer
groups have been weighted based on such company's relative market
capitalization.

![](bmi2013graph6.jpg)  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
December 31

|

|

2008

|

2009

|

2010

|

2011

|

2012

|

2013  
  
Badger Meter, Inc.

|

Return %

|

|

39.11

|

%

|

12.55

|

%

|

(32.27

|

)%

|

63.98

|

%

|

16.64

|

%  
  
|

Cumulative $

|

$

|

100.00

|

  

|

$

|

139.11

|

  

|

$

|

156.57

|

  

|

$

|

106.04

|

  

|

$

|

173.89

|

  

|

$

|

202.82

|

  
  
  
Russell 2000 Index

|

Return %

|

|

27.09

|

%

|

26.81

|

%

|

(4.18

|

)%

|

16.39

|

%

|

38.83

|

%  
  
|

Cumulative $

|

$

|

100.00

|

  

|

$

|

127.09

|

  

|

$

|

161.17

|

  

|

$

|

154.44

|

  

|

$

|

179.75

|

  

|

$

|

249.53

|

  
  
  
Peer Group

|

Return %

|

|

12.10

|

%

|

25.66

|

%

|

(1.16

|

)%

|

37.20

|

%

|

43.26

|

%  
  
|

Cumulative $

|

$

|

100.00

|

  

|

$

|

112.10

|

  

|

$

|

140.87

|

  

|

$

|

139.23

|

  

|

$

|

191.03

|

  

|

$

|

273.67

|

  
  
  
  

The Peer Group consists of A.O. Smith Corp. (AOS), Badger Meter, Inc. (BMI),
CIRCOR International, Inc. (CIR), Colfax Corporation (CFX), ESCO Technologies
Inc. (ESE), Flow International Corporation (FLOW), Franklin Electric Co, Inc.
(FELE), Fuel Systems Solutions, Inc. (FSYS), Gorman-Rupp Company (GRC),
Lindsay Corporation (LNN), Measurement

  

11

* * *

  

  

Specialties, Inc. (MEAS), MFRI, Inc. (MFRI), Mueller Water Products (MWA),
Robbins &amp; Myers, Inc. (RBN) (ceased trading on February 20, 2013), and
Watts Water Technologies, Inc. (WTS).

  

  

12

* * *

  

  

ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Ten Year Summary of Selected Consolidated Financial Data  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Years ended December 31,  
  
(In thousands except per share data)

|

2013

|

2012

|

2011

|

2010

|

2009

|

2008

|

2007

|

2006

|

2005

|

2004  
  
Operating results

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Net sales

|

$334,122

|

319,660

|

262,915

|

276,634

|

250,337

|

279,552

|

234,816

|

229,754

|

203,637

|

188,663  
  
Research and development

|

$10,504

|

9,857

|

8,086

|

7,164

|

6,910

|

7,136

|

5,714

|

5,458

|

5,343

|

4,572  
  
Earnings from continuing operations before income taxes

|

$38,009

|

43,471

|

27,349

|

44,438

|

42,333

|

39,555

|

29,325

|

27,489

|

25,664

|

20,325  
  
Earnings from continuing operations

|

$24,617

|

28,032

|

19,161

|

28,662

|

26,780

|

25,084

|

18,386

|

16,568

|

16,164

|

12,056  
  
Earnings (loss) from discontinued

operations (1)

|

$ n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

7,390

|

n/a

|

(1,929)

|

(9,020)

|

(2,911)

|

(2,423)  
  
Net earnings

|

$24,617

|

28,032

|

19,161

|

28,662

|

34,170

|

25,084

|

16,457

|

7,548

|

13,253

|

9,633  
  
Earnings from continuing operations to sales

|

7.4%

|

8.8%

|

7.3%

|

10.4%

|

10.7%

|

9.0%

|

7.8%

|

7.2%

|

7.4%

|

6.4%  
  
Per Common share

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Basic earnings from continuing operations

|

$1.71

|

1.96

|

1.28

|

1.92

|

1.81

|

1.72

|

1.29

|

1.19

|

1.20

|

0.91  
  
Basic earnings (loss) from discontinued operations

|

$ n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

0.50

|

n/a

|

(0.13)

|

(0.65)

|

(0.22)

|

(0.18)  
  
Total basic earnings

|

$1.71

|

1.96

|

1.28

|

1.92

|

2.31

|

1.72

|

1.16

|

0.54

|

0.98

|

0.73  
  
Diluted earnings from continuing operations

|

$1.70

|

1.95

|

1.27

|

1.91

|

1.79

|

1.69

|

1.26

|

1.15

|

1.15

|

0.89  
  
Diluted earnings (loss) from discontinued operations

|

$ n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

0.49

|

n/a

|

(0.13)

|

(0.63)

|

(0.20)

|

(0.18)  
  
Total diluted earnings

|

$1.70

|

1.95

|

1.27

|

1.91

|

2.28

|

1.69

|

1.13

|

0.52

|

0.95

|

0.71  
  
Cash dividends declared: Common Stock

|

$0.70

|

0.66

|

0.60

|

0.52

|

0.46

|

0.40

|

0.34

|

0.31

|

0.29

|

0.28  
  
Price range - high

|

$56.36

|

48.60

|

45.47

|

45.49

|

44.90

|

62.74

|

46.43

|

32.20

|

25.63

|

16.00  
  
Price range - low

|

$41.88

|

29.30

|

26.86

|

32.58

|

22.50

|

17.58

|

23.00

|

19.51

|

13.23

|

8.53  
  
Closing price

|

$54.50

|

47.41

|

29.43

|

44.22

|

39.82

|

29.02

|

44.95

|

27.70

|

19.62

|

14.98  
  
Book value *

|

$13.64

|

11.96

|

11.85

|

11.19

|

9.65

|

7.50

|

6.33

|

5.07

|

5.36

|

4.77  
  
Shares outstanding at year-end

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Common Stock

|

14,412

|

14,314

|

15,123

|

15,048

|

14,973

|

14,808

|

14,519

|

14,154

|

13,696

|

13,444  
  
Financial position

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Working capital *

|

$29,122

|

27,294

|

78,782

|

64,658

|

60,419

|

35,740

|

38,725

|

33,648

|

32,923

|

25,461  
  
Current ratio *

|

1.3 to 1

|

1.3 to 1

|

4.5 to 1

|

3.0 to 1

|

3.3 to 1

|

1.7 to 1

|

1.9 to 1

|

1.7 to 1

|

1.8 to 1

|

1.6 to 1  
  
Net cash provided by operations

|

$34,818

|

34,801

|

31,317

|

18,396

|

36,588

|

26,143

|

27,934

|

16,750

|

18,361

|

6,297  
  
Capital expenditures

|

$14,311

|

8,202

|

5,336

|

9,238

|

7,750

|

13,237

|

15,971

|

11,060

|

9,088

|

5,582  
  
Total assets

|

$316,058

|

290,453

|

218,910

|

215,864

|

191,016

|

195,358

|

150,301

|

139,383

|

145,867

|

142,961  
  
Short-term and current portion of long-term debt

|

$70,045

|

66,730

|

1,790

|

12,878

|

8,003

|

19,670

|

13,582

|

17,037

|

13,328

|

22,887  
  
Long-term debt

|

$ n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

n/a

|

5,504

|

3,129

|

5,928

|

15,360

|

14,819  
  
Shareholders' equity (2)

|

$196,563

|

171,247

|

179,281

|

168,383

|

144,461

|

111,023

|

91,969

|

71,819

|

73,416

|

64,066  
  
Debt as a percent of total debt and equity *

|

26.3%

|

28.0%

|

1.0%

|

7.1%

|

5.2%

|

18.5%

|

15.4%

|

26.8%

|

30.1%

|

37.0%  
  
Return on shareholders' equity *

|

12.5%

|

16.4%

|

10.7%

|

17.0%

|

18.5%

|

22.6%

|

20.0%

|

23.1%

|

22.0%

|

18.8%  
  
Price/earnings ratio *

|

32.1

|

24.3

|

23.2

|

23.2

|

22.2

|

17.2

|

35.7

|

24.1

|

17.1

|

16.8  
  
  

(1) The Company's French operations have been presented as discontinued
operations through 2007, the years of ownership. In 2009, discontinued
operations represented the recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits
for certain deductions that were taken on prior tax returns related to the
shutdown of the Company's French operations.

  

  

13

* * *

  

  

(2) The Company adopted the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards
Board Accounting Standards Codification 715, "Compensation - Retirement
Benefits" on December 31, 2006, with respect to recognizing the funded status
of pension and postretirement benefit plans, and at December 31, 2008, with
respect to changing the measurement date.

  

*Description of calculations as of the applicable year end:

Book value per share equals total shareholders' equity at year-end divided by
the number of common shares outstanding.

Working capital equals total current assets less total current liabilities.

Current ratio equals total current assets divided by total current
liabilities.

Debt as a percent of total debt and equity equals total debt (the sum of
short-term debt, current portion of long-term debt and long-term debt) divided
by the sum of total debt and total shareholders' equity at year-end. The debt
of the discontinued French operations is included in this calculation through
2007, the years of ownership, although there was no debt at the end of 2007
related to the French operations.

Return on shareholders' equity equals earnings from continuing operations
divided by total shareholders' equity at year-end.

Price/earnings ratio equals the year-end closing stock price for common stock
divided by diluted earnings per share from continuing operations.

  

ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

  

BUSINESS DESCRIPTION AND OVERVIEW

  

An innovator in flow measurement and control products, the Company serves
water utilities, municipalities, and commercial and industrial customers
worldwide. Measuring water, oil, chemicals and other fluids, the Company's
products are known for accuracy, long-lasting durability and for providing
valuable and timely measurement data. The Company's product lines fall into
three categories: sales of water meters and related technologies to municipal
water utilities (municipal water), sales of meters to various industries for
water and other fluids (industrial flow), and sales of gas meter radios and
concrete vibrators to unique markets (specialty products). The Company
estimates that over 75% of its products are used in water applications when
all categories are grouped together.

  

Municipal water, the largest category by sales volume, includes mechanical and
electronic (static) water meters and related technologies and services used by
water utilities as the basis for generating water and wastewater revenues. The
key market for the Company's water meter products is North America, primarily
the United States, because most meters are designed and manufactured to
conform to standards promulgated by the American Water Works Association.
Sales of water meters and related technologies and services are commonly
referred to as residential or commercial water meter sales, the latter
referring to larger sizes of meters.

  

Industrial flow includes products sold worldwide to measure and control
materials flowing through a pipe or pipeline including water, air, steam, oil,
and other liquids and gases. These meters and valves are used in a variety of
applications, such as water/wastewater; heating, ventilating and air
conditioning (HVAC); oil and gas; chemical and petrochemical; food and
beverage; and pharmaceutical production.

  

Specialty products include sales of radio technology to natural gas utilities
for installation on their gas meters, and concrete vibrators.

  

Additional information about the Company's business is described in Part 1,
Item 1 "Business" under the heading "Market Overview, Products, Systems and
Solutions" in this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

  

Business Trends

  

Increasingly, the electric utility industry relies on AMI technology for two-
way communication to monitor and control electrical devices at the customer's
site. Although the Company does not sell products for electric market
applications, the trend toward AMI affects the markets in which the Company
does participate, particularly for those customers in the water utility market
that are interested in more frequent and diverse data collection.
Specifically, AMI and AMA technologies enable water utilities to capture
readings from each meter at more frequent and variable intervals. Similar to
the electric utility industry a few years ago, the water utility industry is
beginning to see the adoption of electronic (static) water meters. Electronic
water metering has lower barriers to entry which could affect the competitive
landscape in North America.

  

The Company sells its technology solutions to meet customer requirements.
Since the technology products have comparable margins, any change in the mix
between AMR, AMI or AMA is not expected to have a significant impact on the
Company's net sales related to meter reading technology.

  

14

* * *

  

  

There are approximately 53,000 water utilities in the United States and the
Company estimates that less than 35% of them have converted to a radio
solutions technology. Although there is growing interest in AMI and AMA
communication by water utilities, the vast majority of utilities installing
such technology continue to select AMR technologies for their applications.
The Company's ORION technology has experienced rapid acceptance in the United
States as an increasing number of water utilities have selected ORION as their
AMR solution. The Company anticipates that even with growing interest in AMI
and AMA, AMR will continue to be the primary product of choice for a number of
years. For many water utilities, AMR technology is simply the most cost-
effective solution available today. However, with the introduction of its
newer product offerings, including the recently introduced BEACON AMA system,
the Company believes it is well-positioned to meet customers' future needs.

  

Acquisitions

  

On April 1, 2013, the Company purchased Aquacue, Inc. ("Aquacue") of Los
Gatos, California. The Aquacue acquisition provides the Company with
intellectual property that complements and expands the Company's advanced
metering analytics offerings by adding an integrated software platform that
allows utility managers to monitor and control their water systems, while
providing water management data to consumers. Sales of Aquacue products were
immaterial for 2013. The purchase price was $13.8 million in cash, including a
small working capital adjustment. The Company merged Aquacue into Badger
Meter, Inc. on December 31, 2013. This acquisition is further described in
Note 3 "Acquisitions" in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

  

On January 31, 2012, the Company completed its acquisition of 100% of the
outstanding common stock of Racine Federated, Inc. ("Racine Federated") of
Racine, Wisconsin and its subsidiary Premier Control Technologies, Ltd.
("PCT") located in Thetford, England for approximately $57.3 million in cash,
plus a working capital adjustment of $0.3 million. During the fourth quarter
of 2012, the Company sold PCT for a nominal amount after the majority of its
functions were absorbed by the Company's European subsidiary. The Company also
merged Racine Federated into Badger Meter, Inc. on December 31, 2012. Racine
Federated manufactures and markets flow meters for the water industry as well
as various industrial metering and specialty products. These products
complement and expand the Company's existing lines for the global flow
measurement business. This acquisition is further described in Note 3
"Acquisitions" in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K.

  

On January 26, 2011, the Company purchased Remag, AG ("Remag") of Bern,
Switzerland for $4.9 million. Remag distributes a line of precision flow
measurement products, some of which they manufacture, for the global
industrial market. Their small turbine meters complement and expand the
Company's existing line of industrial flow products. This acquisition is
further described in Note 3 "Acquisitions" in the accompanying Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013 Annual
Report on Form 10-K.

  

Revenue and Product Mix

  

Prior to the Company's introduction of its own proprietary radio products, for
example ORION and GALAXY, Itron water utility-related products were a dominant
radio products contributor to the Company's results. Itron products are sold
under an agreement between the Company and Itron, Inc. that has been renewed
multiple times and is in effect until early 2016. The Company's radio products
directly compete with Itron water radio products. In recent years, many of the
Company's customers have selected the Company's proprietary products over
Itron products. While the Company's proprietary product sales are generally
greater than those of the Itron licensed products, the Company expects that
Itron products will remain a significant component of sales to water
utilities. Continuing substantial sales in both product lines underscores the
continued acceptance of radio technology by water utilities and affirms the
Company's strategy of selling Itron products in addition to its own
proprietary products.

  

As the industry continues to evolve, the Company has been vigilant in
anticipating and exceeding customer expectations. In 2011, the Company
introduced AMA as a hardware and software solution for water and gas
utilities, and then in early 2014 launched its new BEACON AMA system as a
managed solution which it believes will help maintain the Company's position
as a market leader. The Company continues to seek opportunities for additional
revenue enhancement. For instance, the Company is periodically asked to
oversee and perform field installation of its products for certain customers.
The Company assumes the role of general contractor, hiring installation
subcontractors and supervising their work. The Company also supports its
product and technology sales with the sale of extended service programs that
provide additional services beyond the standard warranty. In recent years, the
Company has sold ORION radio technology to natural gas utilities for
installation on their gas meters. With the exception of a large sale of gas
radios to one particular customer several years ago, the revenues from such
products and services are not yet significant and the Company is uncertain of
the potential growth achievable for such products and services in future
periods.

  

15

* * *

  

  

  

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

  

Net Sales

  

Net sales in 2013 increased $14.4 million, or 4.5%, to $334.1 million from
$319.7 million in 2012. The overall increase was due primarily to higher sales
of municipal water products as a result of higher volumes of units sold,
offset somewhat by lower sales of industrial and specialty products.

  

Municipal water sales increased $17.9 million, or 8.4%, to $231.1 million in
2013 from $213.2 million in 2012. These sales represented 69.2% of total net
sales in 2013 compared to 66.7% in 2012. The sales increase was due to higher
sales of residential meters sold both with and without technology as well as
higher commercial meter sales. Sales of residential meters and related
technology increased 6.9% for the year due to higher volumes of product sold,
slightly offset by lower average prices. Commercial water meter sales
increased 15.2% in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to higher volumes of
product sold. The Company believes the net overall increase for the year was a
continuation of a return to normal buying patterns that began in 2012,
although sales were negatively affected in early 2013 by a colder and snowier
winter and the effects of Hurricane Sandy. In addition, part of the increase
was due to additional sales to former customers of a competitor that ceased
North American production of mechanical meters on June 30, 2013. The Company
estimates sales to these customers were approximately $4.1 million in 2013.

  

Industrial flow products represented 27.3% of total net sales in 2013 compared
to 29.0% in 2012. These sales decreased $1.6 million, or 1.7%, to $91.2
million from $92.8 million in 2012. Sales of products within this category
were affected by general economic conditions which resulted in weaker orders.

  

Specialty products represented 3.5% of total net sales in 2013 compared to
4.3% in 2012. These sales decreased $1.9 million in 2013, or 13.9%, to $11.8
million from $13.7 million in 2012. The decline was caused by lower sales of
radios into the natural gas market and lower sales of concrete vibrators.

  

International sales for municipal water meters and related technologies are
generally made to customers in Canada and Mexico, which use similar mechanical
technology and standards as customers in the U.S. International sales for
industrial flow and specialty products are generally made throughout the
world. In Europe, sales are made primarily in Euros. Other international sales
are made in U.S. dollars or local currencies. International sales decreased
9.3% to $44.1 million in 2013 from $48.6 million in 2012 primarily due to the
timing of large projects and general economic conditions.

  

Net sales in 2012 increased $56.8 million, or 21.6%, to $319.7 million from
$262.9 million in 2011. The overall increase was due to the inclusion of
Racine Federated's net sales for eleven months of the year and higher
municipal water sales, offset somewhat by lower sales of radios to natural gas
utilities. Racine Federated's sales for the eleven months ended December 31,
2012 were $41.3 million.

  

Municipal water sales increased $22.9 million, or 12.0%, to $213.2 million in
2012 from $190.3 million in 2011. These sales represented 66.7% of total net
sales in 2012 compared to 72.4% in 2011. The sales increase was due to higher
sales of residential meters sold with technology as well as higher commercial
meter sales. Sales of meters with technology increased 11.6% for the year due
to higher volumes of product sold. Sales of manually read residential meters
were essentially flat between years. Commercial water meter sales increased
19.5% in 2012 compared to 2011 due to higher volumes of product sold. The
Company believes the net overall increase for the year was due to normal
buying patterns beginning to resume after a period where there were negative
factors affecting market conditions. These factors included lingering concerns
about municipal spending, which resulted in delayed buying decisions, and
slower housing starts. In addition, the Company's introduction in 2011 of the
next generation of the ORION product lengthened the sales cycle for water
utilities as they evaluated this new technology. Weather may have also played
a role as poor weather in the Midwest and Northeast had a negative impact on
sales in early 2011 due to its effects on budget demands and installation
rates, which did not recur in early 2012.

  

Industrial flow products represented 29.0% of total net sales in 2012 compared
to 21.5% in 2011. These sales increased $36.2 million, or 64.0%, to $92.8
million from $56.6 million in 2011. As previously noted, Racine Federated was
acquired on January 31, 2012 and Racine Federated's sales were included from
that point forward. Within this product grouping, Racine Federated's sales
were $32.6 million. The remainder of the increase was due to higher sales in
most of the remaining industrial flow product lines.

  

Specialty products represented 4.3% of total net sales in 2012 compared to
6.1% in 2011. These sales decreased $2.3

  

16

* * *

  

  

million in 2012, or 14.4%, to $13.7 million from $16.0 million in 2011.
Included in this product grouping was $8.7 million of sales from Racine
Federated. Without these sales, specialty products would have shown a larger
sales decrease due to lower sales of radios into the natural gas market. The
2011 sales included higher sales of radios to one particular natural gas
customer that did not recur in 2012.

  

International sales for municipal water meters and related technologies are
generally made to customers in Canada and Mexico, which use similar mechanical
technology and standards as customers in the U.S. International sales for
industrial flow and specialty products are generally made throughout the
world. In Europe, sales are made primarily in Euros. Other international sales
are made in U.S. dollars or local currencies. International sales increased
53.8% to $48.6 million in 2012 from $31.6 million in 2011 primarily due to the
addition of Racine Federated's product lines.

  

Gross Margins

Gross margins as a percentage of sales were 35.0%, 38.2% and 34.2% for 2013,
2012 and 2011, respectively. The percentage decline in 2013 from the 2012 rate
was due to a higher mix of municipal water sales compared to industrial flow
sales which carry higher margins, lower prices charged to the former customers
of a competitor that ceased North American production of water meters, higher
obsolete inventory charges, higher costs of electronics due to foreign
exchange effects, and higher costs of metal alloy as the shift to lead-free
brass was completed.

  

The gross margin percentage increase in 2012 over the 2011 rate was due in
part to the addition of Racine Federated's products, whose margins are
generally a higher percentage than the Company's overall weighted margin
percentage. Margins also increased due to lower costs for castings which
fluctuate with the metals market, and higher sales volumes in general which
increased overall factory utilization. Offsetting these factors was the impact
of lower sales of radios to natural gas utilities.

  

Operating Expenses

Selling, engineering and administration expenses in 2013 were $0.1 million, or
0.1% higher than these expenses in 2012. The 2012 amounts included a $1.0
million charge related to the write down of the Company's investment in an
emerging technology company. The 2013 amounts include intangible amortization
charges associated with the Aquacue acquisition, charges associated with a
legal issue and normal inflationary increases. Offsetting these increases were
lower employee incentives and continuing cost control measures.

  

Selling, engineering and administration expenses in 2012 increased $15.5
million, or 24.9%, over these expenses in 2011. The increase was primarily
attributable to the acquisition of Racine Federated and amortization of
intangibles acquired, which were not included in the results for 2011. The
remainder of the increase was due to higher employee incentives and normal
inflationary increases, offset by continuing cost control measures. The 2012
amounts include a $1.0 million charge related to the write down of the
Company's investment in an emerging technology company and a $1.1 million non-
cash pension charge as a result of payouts from the pension plan occurring
faster than the assumed rate.

  

Operating Earnings

  

Operating earnings in 2013 decreased $5.4 million, or 12.1%, to $39.1 million
compared to $44.5 million in 2012. The decrease was the result of the lower
gross margins resulting from the mix of sales, the lower prices charged to
customers of a former competitor, higher obsolescence costs and higher alloy
costs, all offset somewhat by the higher net sales.

  

Operating earnings in 2012 increased $17.0 million, or 61.8%, to $44.5 million
compared to $27.5 million in 2011, as a net result of the higher sales of
municipal water and industrial flow products, offset somewhat by higher
selling, engineering and administration expenses. In addition, lower costs of
certain raw materials also contributed to the increased operating earnings.

  

Interest Expense, Net

Interest expense, net was $1.1 million in 2013 compared to $1.0 million in
2012. The slight increase was due to higher average borrowings due in part to
the Aquacue acquisition in April 2013.

  

Interest expense, net was $1.0 million in 2012 compared to $0.2 million in
2011. The increase was due primarily to higher borrowings in 2012 associated
with the acquisition of Racine Federated and the Company's stock repurchase
program.

  

  

17

* * *

  

  

Income Taxes

  

Income taxes as a percentage of earnings before income taxes were 35.2%, 35.5%
and 29.9% for 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The 2011 results include
recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits for certain deductions
that were taken on prior tax returns. These benefits total approximately $1.3
million and were recognized in earnings in 2011 due to the realization that
such benefits became more likely than not upon the conclusion of an IRS audit
of the Company's 2009 Federal income tax return. Without these benefits, the
provision for income taxes as a percentage of earnings before income taxes for
2011 would have been 34.8%. The variances in all three years presented are due
to the changes in state taxes depending on each year's sales and the
relationship of foreign and domestic income which are taxed at different
rates.

Earnings and Diluted Earnings Per Share

Because of the decreased operating earnings, net earnings were $24.6 million
in 2013 compared to $28.0 million in 2012. On a diluted basis, earnings per
share were $1.70 in 2013 compared to $1.95 in 2012.

  

As a result of the increased operating earnings, offset somewhat by a higher
effective tax rate, net earnings were $28.0 million in 2012 compared to $19.2
million in 2011. On a diluted basis, earnings per share were $1.95 in 2012
compared to $1.27 in 2011.

  

LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES

The main sources of liquidity for the Company are cash from operations and
borrowing capacity. In addition, depending on market conditions, the Company
may access the capital markets to strengthen its capital position and to
provide additional liquidity for general corporate purposes. Cash provided by
operations in 2013 was $34.8 million compared to $34.8 million in 2012. The
2013 amount had lower earnings, an increase in receivables and a decrease in
certain liabilities from 2012, while the 2012 amounts contained an increase in
inventories and a pension payment that did not recur in 2013.

  

Receivables at December 31, 2013 were $50.1 million compared to $45.6 million
at the end of 2012. The increase was due in part to higher sales in the fourth
quarter of 2013 compared to the fourth quarter of 2012. The Company believes
its net receivables balance is fully collectible.

  

Inventories at December 31, 2013 were $60.9 million and substantially
unchanged from $61.0 million at December 31, 2012.

  

Property, plant and equipment increased as a net result of capital
expenditures offset by depreciation expense. Capital expenditures totaled
$14.3 million in 2013 compared to $8.2 million in 2012. These amounts vary due
to the timing of capital expenditures. The Company believes it has adequate
capacity to increase production levels with minimal additional capital
expenditures.

  

Intangible assets decreased to $57.3 million at December 31, 2013 from $58.4
million at December 31, 2012. This is the net impact of a $3.9 million
increase due to the acquisition of Aquacue, more than offset by normal
amortization expense. Also, as a result of the Aquacue acquisition, goodwill
increased to $44.7 million at December 31, 2013 compared to $35.9 million at
December 31, 2012.

  

Due to higher than expected returns for the Company's pension assets, there
was a prepaid pension amount of $4.3 million at December 31, 2013. At December
31, 2012, a pension liability of $4.2 million was included in other accrued
employee benefits, which saw a reduction to $4.4 million at December 31, 2013
from $8.9 million at December 31, 2012.

  

Short-term debt increased from December 31, 2012 to December 31, 2013 as the
Company borrowed funds for its acquisition of Aquacue. At the end of 2013,
debt represented 26.3% of the Company's total capitalization. None of the debt
is secured by the Company's assets.

  

Payables increased at December 31, 2013 to $18.6 million compared to $15.6
million at December 31, 2012. The 2012 amount included $4.6 million owed to
the sellers of Racine Federated that was paid July 31, 2013. The 2013 amount
includes $3.0 million owed to the sellers of Aquacue that will be paid in
2014. The remainder of the increase was due to the timing of purchases.

  

Accrued compensation and employee benefits decreased $2.5 million to $7.3
million at December 31, 2013 from $9.8 million at December 31, 2012 primarily
due to lower accrued employee incentives.

  

18

* * *

  

  

  

The overall increase in total shareholders' equity from $171.2 million at
December 31, 2012 to $196.6 million at December 31, 2013 was principally the
result of net earnings, stock options exercised and a reduction in Accumulated
Other Comprehensive Loss as a result of favorable actuarial gains, net of
their tax effect, offset by dividends paid.

  

The Company's financial condition remains strong. In May 2012, the Company
signed a new credit agreement that increased its principal line of credit from
$90.0 million to $125.0 million with its primary lender for a three year
period. The line was reduced by $16.7 million in May 2013 and will be reduced
by a similar amount in May 2014. While the facility is unsecured, there are a
number of financial covenants with which the Company is in compliance. The
Company believes that its operating cash flows, available borrowing capacity,
and its ability to raise capital provide adequate resources to fund ongoing
operating requirements, future capital expenditures and the development of new
products. The Company continues to take advantage of its local commercial
paper market and carefully monitors the current borrowing market. The Company
had $47.8 million of unused credit lines available at December 31, 2013.

  

OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS

  

The Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2013.

  

CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS

  

In 2010, the Company restructured the outstanding debt of its Employee Savings
and Stock Option Plan (the "ESSOP") by loaning the ESSOP $0.5 million to repay
a loan to a third party and loaning the ESSOP an additional $1.0 million to
purchase additional shares of the Company's Common Stock for future 401(k)
savings plan matches under a program that will expire on December 31, 2020.
Under this program, the Company agreed to pay the principal and interest on
the new loan amount of $1.5 million. The receivable from the ESSOP and the
related obligation were therefore netted to zero on the Company's Consolidated
Balance Sheets at December 31, 2013 and 2012. The terms of the loan call for
equal payments of principal with the final payment due on December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2013, $1.1 million of the loan balance remains.

The following table includes the Company's significant contractual obligations
as of December 31, 2013. There are no material undisclosed guarantees.  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Payments due by period  
  
|

Total

|

|

Less than

1 year

|

|

1-3 years

|

|

3-5 years

|

|

Beyond  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Short-term debt

|

$

|

70,045

|

  

|

|

$

|

70,045

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  
  
  
Operating leases

|

12,891

|

  

|

|

1,681

|

  

|

|

2,546

|

  

|

|

1,994

|

  

|

|

6,670

|

  
  
  
Total contractual obligations

|

$

|

82,936

|

  

|

|

$

|

71,726

|

  

|

|

$

|

2,546

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,994

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,670

|

  
  
  
Other than items included in the preceding table, as of December 31, 2013, the
Company had no additional material purchase obligations other than those
created in the ordinary course of business related to inventory and property,
plant and equipment, which generally have terms of less than 90 days. The
Company also has long-term obligations related to its pension and
postretirement plans which are discussed in detail in Note 7 "Employee Benefit
Plans" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of
this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K.  As of the most recent actuarial
measurement date, the Company is not required to make a minimum contribution
for its pension plan for the 2014 calendar year. Postretirement medical claims
are paid by the Company as they are submitted, and they are anticipated to be
$0.5 million in 2014 based on actuarial estimates; however, these amounts can
vary significantly from year to year because the Company is self-insured.

  

CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES

  

The Company's accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 "Summary
of Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K. As
discussed in Note 1, the preparation of financial statements in conformity
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial
statements and accompanying notes. The Company's more significant estimates
relate primarily to the following judgmental reserves: allowance for doubtful
accounts, reserve for obsolete inventories, warranty and after-sale costs
reserve, and the healthcare reserve for claims incurred, but not reported.
Each of these reserves is evaluated quarterly and is reviewed with the
Company's Disclosure Committee and the Audit and Compliance Committee of the
Board of Directors. The basis for the reserve amounts is determined by
analyzing

  

19

* * *

  

  

the anticipated exposure for each account, and then selecting the most likely
amount based upon historical experience and various other considerations that
are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. These methods have been
used for all years in the presented financials and have been used consistently
throughout each year. Actual results may differ from these estimates if actual
experiences vary from the Company's assumptions.

  

The criteria used for calculating each of the reserve amounts vary by type of
reserve. For the allowance for doubtful accounts reserve, significant past due
balances are individually reviewed for collectibility, while the balance of
accounts are reviewed in conjunction with applying historical write-off
ratios. The calculation for the obsolete inventories reserve is determined by
analyzing the relationship between the age and quantity of items on hand
versus estimated usage to determine if excess quantities exist. The
calculation for warranty and after-sale costs reserve uses criteria that
include known potential problems on past sales as well as historical claim
experience and current warranty trends. The healthcare reserve for claims
incurred, but not reported is determined by using medical cost trend analyses,
reviewing subsequent payments made and estimating unbilled amounts. The
changes in the balances of these reserves at December 31, 2013 compared to the
prior year were due to normal business conditions and are not deemed to be
significant. While the Company continually tries to improve its estimates, no
significant changes in the underlying processes are expected in 2014.

  

The Company also uses estimates in four other significant areas: (i) pension
and other postretirement obligations and costs, (ii) stock-based compensation,
(iii) income taxes, and (iv) evaluating goodwill at least annually for
impairment. The actuarial valuations of benefit obligations and net periodic
benefit costs rely on key assumptions including discount rates and long-term
expected returns on plan assets. The Company's discount rate assumptions for
its pension and postretirement plans are based on the average yield of a
hypothetical high quality bond portfolio with maturities that approximately
match the estimated cash flow needs of the plans. The assumptions for expected
long-term rates of return on assets for its pension plan are based on
historical experience and estimated future investment returns, taking into
consideration anticipated asset allocations, investment strategies and the
views of various investment professionals. The total cost of the Company's
stock-based awards is equal to the grant date fair value per award multiplied
by the number of awards granted, adjusted for forfeitures. Forfeitures are
initially estimated based on historical Company information and subsequently
updated over the life of the awards to ultimately reflect actual forfeitures,
which could have an impact on the amount of stock compensation cost recognized
from period to period. In calculating the provision for income taxes on an
interim basis, the Company uses an estimate of the annual effective tax rate
based upon the facts and circumstances known at each interim period. On a
quarterly basis, the actual effective tax rate is adjusted as appropriate
based upon the actual results compared to those forecasted at the beginning of
the fiscal year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using
enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which
those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The
reserve for uncertainty in income taxes is a matter of judgment based on an
evaluation of the individual facts and circumstances of each tax position in
light of all available evidence, including historic data and current trends. A
tax benefit is recognized when it is "more likely than not" to be sustained
based solely on the technical merits of each tax position. The Company
evaluates and updates all of these assumptions quarterly. Goodwill impairment,
if any, is determined by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with
its carrying value and is reviewed at least annually. Actual results may
differ from these estimates.

  

OTHER MATTERS

The Company is subject to contingencies related to environmental laws and
regulations. The Company is named as one of many potentially responsible
parties in two landfill lawsuits. The landfill sites are impacted by the
Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
and other environmental laws and regulations. At this time, the Company does
not believe the ultimate resolution of these matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations,
either from a cash flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.
This belief is based on the Company's assessment of its limited past
involvement with these landfill sites as well as the substantial involvement
of and government focus on other named third parties with these landfill
sites. However, due to the inherent uncertainties of such proceedings, the
Company cannot predict the ultimate outcome of any of these matters. A future
change in circumstances with respect to these specific matters or with respect
to sites formerly or currently owned or operated by the Company, off-site
disposal locations used by the Company, and property owned by third parties
that is near such sites, could result in future costs to the Company and such
amounts could be material. Expenditures for compliance with environmental
control provisions and regulations during 2013, 2012 and 2011 were not
material.

  

Like other companies in recent years, the Company is named as a defendant in
numerous pending multi-claimant/multi-defendant lawsuits alleging personal
injury as a result of exposure to asbestos, manufactured by third parties, and
integrated into or sold with a very limited number of the Company's products.
The Company is vigorously defending itself against these claims. Although it
is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters, the Company
does not believe the ultimate resolution of these issues will have a material
adverse effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations,
either from a cash flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.
This belief is based in part on the fact

  

20

* * *

  

  

that no claimant has proven or substantially demonstrated asbestos exposure
caused by products manufactured or sold by the Company and that a number of
cases have been voluntarily dismissed.

  

See the "Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements" at the front of
this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Part I, Item 1A "Risk Factors" in this
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 for a
discussion of risks and uncertainties that could impact the Company's
financial performance and results of operations.

  

MARKET RISKS

  

In the ordinary course of business, the Company is exposed to various market
risks. The Company operates in an environment where competition varies from
moderate to intense. The Company believes it currently provides the leading
technology in water meters and radio systems for water utilities. A number of
the Company's competitors in certain markets have greater financial resources.
Competitors also include alliance partners that sell products that do or may
compete with our products, particularly those that provide radio solutions. As
the global water metering market begins to shift to adopt electronic (static)
technology, the number of competitors may increase. In addition, the market's
level of acceptance of the Company's newer product offerings, including the
recently introduced BEACON AMA system, may have a significant effect on the
Company's results of operations. As a result of significant research and
development activities, the Company enjoys favorable patent positions for
several of its products.

  

The Company's ability to generate operating income and to increase
profitability depends somewhat on the general health of the United States and
foreign economies, including to some extent such things as the length and
severity of global economic downturns; the timing and size of governmental
programs such as stimulus fund programs, as well as the impact of government
budget cuts or partial shutdowns of governmental operations; the ability of
municipal water utility customers to authorize and finance purchases of the
Company's products; the Company's ability to obtain financing; housing starts
in the United States; and overall industrial activity. In addition, changes in
governmental laws and regulations, particularly laws dealing with the use of
lead or rules affecting the use and/or licensing of radio frequencies
necessary for radio products may impact the results of operations. These
factors are largely beyond the Company's control and depend on the economic
condition and regulatory environment of the geographic region of the Company's
operations.

  

The Company relies on single suppliers for certain castings and components in
several of its product lines. Although alternate sources of supply exist for
these items, the loss of certain suppliers could temporarily disrupt
operations in the short term. The Company attempts to mitigate these risks by
working closely with key suppliers, purchasing minimal amounts from
alternative suppliers and by purchasing business interruption insurance where
appropriate.

  

Raw materials used in the manufacture of the Company's products include
purchased castings made of metal or alloys (such as brass, which uses copper
as its main component, aluminum, stainless steel and cast iron), plastic
resins, glass, microprocessors and other electronic subassemblies and
components. The Company does not hold significant amounts of precious metals.
The price and availability of raw materials is influenced by economic and
industry conditions, including supply and demand factors that are difficult to
anticipate and cannot be controlled by the Company. Commodity risk is managed
by keeping abreast of economic conditions and locking in purchase prices for
quantities that correspond to the Company's forecasted usage.

  

The Company's foreign currency risk relates to the sales of products to
foreign customers and purchases of material from foreign vendors. The Company
uses lines of credit with U.S. and European banks to offset currency exposure
related to European receivables and other monetary assets. As of December 31,
2013 and 2012, the Company's foreign currency net monetary assets were
partially offset by comparable debt resulting in no material exposure to the
results of operations. The Company believes the effect of a change in foreign
currency rates will not have a material adverse effect on the Company's
financial position or results of operations, either from a cash flow
perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.

  

The Company typically does not hold or issue derivative instruments and has a
policy specifically prohibiting the use of such instruments for trading
purposes.

  

The Company's short-term debt on December 31, 2013 was floating rate debt with
market values approximating carrying value. Future annual interest costs for
short-term debt will fluctuate based upon short-term interest rates. For the
short-term debt on hand on December 31, 2013, the effect of a 1% change in
interest rates is approximately $0.7 million.

  

  

  

  

  

21

* * *

  

  

ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK

Information required by this Item is set forth in Part II, Item 7
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations" under the heading "Market Risks" in this 2013 Annual Report on
Form 10-K.

  

  

22

* * *

  

  

ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTAL DATA

  

BADGER METER, INC.

  

Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting

  

The Company's management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in
Rule 13a-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Company's
internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with U.S.
generally accepted accounting principles.

  

Due to its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may
not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

  

The Company's management assessed the effectiveness of the Company's internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2013 using the criteria
set forth in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (1992 Framework). Based
on this assessment, the Company's management believes that, as of December 31,
2013, the Company's internal control over financial reporting was effective
based on those criteria.

Ernst &amp; Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, has
audited the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report
on Form 10-K and, as part of its audit, has issued an attestation report,
included herein, on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over
financial reporting.

  

  

23

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

  

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

  

  

The Board of Directors and Shareholders of Badger Meter, Inc.

  

We have audited Badger Meter, Inc.'s (the "Company") internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2013, based on criteria established in
Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (1992 framework) (the COSO criteria).
Badger Meter, Inc.'s management is responsible for maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the
accompanying Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial
Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.

  

We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all
material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness
exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that
our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.

  

A company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company's internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets
of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts
and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.

  

Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting
may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation
of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

  

In our opinion, Badger Meter, Inc. maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2013,
based on the COSO criteria.

We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated balance sheets of
Badger Meter, Inc. as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, shareholders'
equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December
31, 2013 and our report dated February 20, 2014, expressed an unqualified
opinion thereon.

  

/s/ Ernst &amp; Young LLP

  

  

Milwaukee, Wisconsin

February 20, 2014

  

  

24

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

  

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

  

  

The Board of Directors and Shareholders of Badger Meter, Inc.

  

We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Badger Meter,
Inc. (the "Company") as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, shareholders'
equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December
31, 2013. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits.

  

We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.

  

In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in
all material respects, the consolidated financial position of Badger Meter,
Inc. at December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the consolidated results of its
operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2013, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles.

  

We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States), Badger Meter, Inc.'s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2013, based on criteria
established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (1992 framework) and
our report dated February 20, 2014 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.

/s/ Ernst &amp; Young LLP

  

  

Milwaukee, Wisconsin

February 20, 2014

  

  

25

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Consolidated Balance Sheets  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

December 31,  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(Dollars in thousands)  
  
Assets  
  
Current assets:

|

|

|  
  
Cash

|

$

|

7,263

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,554

|

  
  
  
Receivables

|

50,133

|

  

|

|

45,584

|

  
  
  
Inventories:

|

|

|  
  
Finished goods

|

17,704

|

  

|

|

19,872

|

  
  
  
Work in process

|

12,330

|

  

|

|

13,340

|

  
  
  
Raw materials

|

30,905

|

  

|

|

27,785

|

  
  
  
Total inventories

|

60,939

|

  

|

|

60,997

|

  
  
  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets

|

3,994

|

  

|

|

4,343

|

  
  
  
Deferred income taxes

|

4,834

|

  

|

|

3,896

|

  
  
  
Total current assets

|

127,163

|

  

|

|

121,374

|

  
  
  
Property, plant and equipment, at cost:

|

|

|  
  
Land and improvements

|

8,941

|

  

|

|

8,919

|

  
  
  
Buildings and improvements

|

55,018

|

  

|

|

51,090

|

  
  
  
Machinery and equipment

|

100,179

|

  

|

|

92,751

|

  
  
  
|

164,138

|

  

|

|

152,760

|

  
  
  
Less accumulated depreciation

|

(87,722

|

)

|

|

(82,276

|

)  
  
Net property, plant and equipment

|

76,416

|

  

|

|

70,484

|

  
  
  
Intangible assets, at cost less accumulated amortization

|

57,317

|

  

|

|

58,351

|

  
  
  
Prepaid pension

|

4,312

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Other assets

|

6,155

|

  

|

|

4,314

|

  
  
  
Goodwill

|

44,695

|

  

|

|

35,930

|

  
  
  
Total assets

|

$

|

316,058

|

  

|

|

$

|

290,453

|

  
  
  
Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity  
  
Current liabilities:

|

|

|  
  
Short-term debt

|

$

|

70,045

|

  

|

|

$

|

66,730

|

  
  
  
Payables

|

18,554

|

  

|

|

15,551

|

  
  
  
Accrued compensation and employee benefits

|

7,337

|

  

|

|

9,821

|

  
  
  
Warranty and after-sale costs

|

882

|

  

|

|

881

|

  
  
  
Income and other taxes

|

1,223

|

  

|

|

1,097

|

  
  
  
Total current liabilities

|

98,041

|

  

|

|

94,080

|

  
  
  
Other long-term liabilities

|

1,324

|

  

|

|

1,086

|

  
  
  
Deferred income taxes

|

9,790

|

  

|

|

8,692

|

  
  
  
Accrued non-pension postretirement benefits

|

5,934

|

  

|

|

6,489

|

  
  
  
Other accrued employee benefits

|

4,406

|

  

|

|

8,859

|

  
  
  
Commitments and contingencies (Note 6)

|

  

|

|

  
  
  
Shareholders' equity:

|

|

|  
  
Common Stock, $1 par; authorized 40,000,000 shares; issued 20,503,604 shares
in 2013 and 20,441,184 shares in 2012

|

20,504

|

  

|

|

20,441

|

  
  
  
Capital in excess of par value

|

45,627

|

  

|

|

41,755

|

  
  
  
Reinvested earnings

|

170,318

|

  

|

|

155,694

|

  
  
  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss

|

(7,524

|

)

|

|

(13,948

|

)  
  
Less: Employee benefit stock

|

(1,075

|

)

|

|

(1,234

|

)  
  
Treasury stock, at cost; 6,091,728 shares in 2013 and 6,127,155 shares in 2012

|

(31,287

|

)

|

|

(31,461

|

)  
  
Total shareholders' equity

|

196,563

|

  

|

|

171,247

|

  
  
  
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity

|

$

|

316,058

|

  

|

|

$

|

290,453

|

  
  
  
See accompanying notes.

  

26

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Consolidated Statements of Operations  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Years ended December 31,  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands except per share amounts)  
  
Net sales

|

$

|

334,122

|

  

|

|

$

|

319,660

|

  

|

|

$

|

262,915

|

  
  
  
Cost of sales

|

217,133

|

  

|

|

197,414

|

  

|

|

173,095

|

  
  
  
Gross margin

|

116,989

|

  

|

|

122,246

|

  

|

|

89,820

|

  
  
  
Selling, engineering and administration

|

77,882

|

  

|

|

77,777

|

  

|

|

62,286

|

  
  
  
Operating earnings

|

39,107

|

  

|

|

44,469

|

  

|

|

27,534

|

  
  
  
Interest expense, net

|

1,098

|

  

|

|

998

|

  

|

|

185

|

  
  
  
Earnings before income taxes

|

38,009

|

  

|

|

43,471

|

  

|

|

27,349

|

  
  
  
Provision for income taxes

|

13,392

|

  

|

|

15,439

|

  

|

|

8,188

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

$

|

24,617

|

  

|

|

$

|

28,032

|

  

|

|

$

|

19,161

|

  
  
  
|

|

|

|

|  
  
Earnings per share:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Basic

|

$

|

1.71

|

  

|

|

$

|

1.96

|

  

|

|

$

|

1.28

|

  
  
  
|

|

|

|

|  
  
Diluted

|

$

|

1.70

|

  

|

|

$

|

1.95

|

  

|

|

$

|

1.27

|

  
  
  
|

|

|

|

|  
  
Shares used in computation of earnings per share:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Basic

|

14,362

|

  

|

|

14,332

|

  

|

|

14,971

|

  
  
  
Impact of dilutive securities

|

78

|

  

|

|

67

|

  

|

|

78

|

  
  
  
Diluted

|

14,440

|

  

|

|

14,399

|

  

|

|

15,049

|

  
  
  
See accompanying notes.

  

27

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Years ended December 31,  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(Dollars in thousands)  
  
Net earnings

|

$

|

24,617

|

  

|

|

$

|

28,032

|

  

|

|

$

|

19,161

|

  
  
  
Other comprehensive income :

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Foreign currency translation adjustment

|

172

|

  

|

|

393

|

  

|

|

(267

|

)  
  
Employee benefit funded status adjustment, net of tax

|

6,252

|

  

|

|

225

|

  

|

|

(1,162

|

)  
  
Comprehensive income

|

$

|

31,041

|

  

|

|

$

|

28,650

|

  

|

|

$

|

17,732

|

  
  
  
See accompanying notes.

  

  

28

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Years ended December 31,  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(Dollars in thousands)  
  
Operating activities:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Net earnings

|

$

|

24,617

|

  

|

|

$

|

28,032

|

  

|

|

$

|

19,161

|

  
  
  
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operations:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Depreciation

|

8,512

|

  

|

|

7,587

|

  

|

|

7,144

|

  
  
  
Amortization

|

4,982

|

  

|

|

4,467

|

  

|

|

2,347

|

  
  
  
Deferred income taxes

|

1,462

|

  

|

|

(551

|

)

|

|

(800

|

)  
  
Contributions to pension plan

|

--

|

  

|

|

(1,097

|

)

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Noncurrent employee benefits

|

1,392

|

  

|

|

122

|

  

|

|

4,704

|

  
  
  
Stock-based compensation expense

|

1,388

|

  

|

|

1,266

|

  

|

|

1,470

|

  
  
  
Changes in:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Receivables

|

(3,991

|

)

|

|

812

|

  

|

|

(616

|

)  
  
Inventories

|

247

|

  

|

|

(4,743

|

)

|

|

42

|

  
  
  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets

|

368

|

  

|

|

(905

|

)

|

|

(850

|

)  
  
Liabilities other than debt

|

(4,159

|

)

|

|

(188

|

)

|

|

(1,285

|

)  
  
Total adjustments

|

10,201

|

  

|

|

6,770

|

  

|

|

12,156

|

  
  
  
Net cash provided by operations

|

34,818

|

  

|

|

34,802

|

  

|

|

31,317

|

  
  
  
Investing activities:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Property, plant and equipment additions

|

(14,311

|

)

|

|

(8,202

|

)

|

|

(5,336

|

)  
  
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired

|

(15,401

|

)

|

|

(51,518

|

)

|

|

(3,954

|

)  
  
Net cash used for investing activities

|

(29,712

|

)

|

|

(59,720

|

)

|

|

(9,290

|

)  
  
Financing activities:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Net increase (decrease) in short-term debt

|

3,205

|

  

|

|

65,136

|

  

|

|

(11,893

|

)  
  
Dividends paid

|

(10,004

|

)

|

|

(9,513

|

)

|

|

(9,023

|

)  
  
Proceeds from exercise of stock options

|

1,640

|

  

|

|

382

|

  

|

|

236

|

  
  
  
Tax benefit on stock options

|

382

|

  

|

|

297

|

  

|

|

190

|

  
  
  
Repurchase of Common Stock

|

--

|

  

|

|

(30,000

|

)

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Issuance of treasury stock

|

498

|

  

|

|

477

|

  

|

|

493

|

  
  
  
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities

|

(4,279

|

)

|

|

26,779

|

  

|

|

(19,997

|

)  
  
Effect of foreign exchange rates on cash

|

(118

|

)

|

|

(282

|

)

|

|

(144

|

)  
  
Increase in cash

|

709

|

  

|

|

1,579

|

  

|

|

1,886

|

  
  
  
Cash -- beginning of year

|

6,554

|

  

|

|

4,975

|

  

|

|

3,089

|

  
  
  
Cash -- end of year

|

$

|

7,263

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,554

|

  

|

|

$

|

4,975

|

  
  
  
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Cash paid during the year for:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Income taxes

|

$

|

15,292

|

  

|

|

$

|

15,247

|

  

|

|

$

|

10,308

|

  
  
  
Interest

|

$

|

1,114

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,113

|

  

|

|

$

|

324

|

  
  
  
See accompanying notes.

  

29

* * *

  

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Consolidated Statements of Shareholders' Equity

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Years ended December 31,  
  
|

Common

Stock at $1

par value*

|

|

Capital in

excess of

par value

|

|

Reinvested

earnings

|

|

Accumulated

other

comprehensive

income

(loss)

|

|

Employee

benefit

stock

|

|

Treasury

stock

|

|

Total  
  
|

(In thousands except per share amounts)  
  
Balance, December 31, 2010

|

$

|

21,259

|

  

|

|

$

|

37,582

|

  

|

|

$

|

156,101

|

  

|

|

$

|

(13,137

|

)

|

|

$

|

(1,536

|

)

|

|

$

|

(31,886

|

)

|

|

$

|

168,383

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

19,161

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

19,161

|

  
  
  
Employee benefit funded status adjustment (net of $835 tax effect)

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(1,162

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(1,162

|

)  
  
Foreign currency translation

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(267

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(267

|

)  
  
Cash dividends of $0.60 per share

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(8,991

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(8,991

|

)  
  
Stock options exercised

|

33

|

  

|

|

202

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

235

|

  
  
  
Tax benefit on stock options and dividends

|

--

|

  

|

|

190

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

190

|

  
  
  
ESSOP transactions

|

--

|

  

|

|

53

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

51

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

104

|

  
  
  
Stock-based compensation

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,134

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,134

|

  
  
  
Issuance of treasury stock (41 shares)

|

--

|

  

|

|

284

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

210

|

  

|

|

494

|

  
  
  
Balance, December 31, 2011

|

21,292

|

  

|

|

39,445

|

  

|

|

166,271

|

  

|

|

(14,566

|

)

|

|

(1,485

|

)

|

|

(31,676

|

)

|

|

179,281

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

28,032

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

28,032

|

  
  
  
Employee benefit funded status adjustment (net of $(247) tax effect)

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

225

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

225

|

  
  
  
Foreign currency translation

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

393

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

393

|

  
  
  
Cash dividends of $0.66 per share

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(9,497

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(9,497

|

)  
  
Stock options exercised

|

37

|

  

|

|

345

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

382

|

  
  
  
Tax benefit on stock options and dividends

|

--

|

  

|

|

297

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

297

|

  
  
  
ESSOP transactions

|

--

|

  

|

|

141

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

251

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

392

|

  
  
  
Stock-based compensation

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,266

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,266

|

  
  
  
Shares purchased and retired

|

(888

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(29,112

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(30,000

|

)  
  
Issuance of treasury stock (42 shares)

|

--

|

  

|

|

261

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

215

|

  

|

|

476

|

  
  
  
Balance, December 31, 2012

|

20,441

|

  

|

|

41,755

|

  

|

|

155,694

|

  

|

|

(13,948

|

)

|

|

(1,234

|

)

|

|

(31,461

|

)

|

|

171,247

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

24,617

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

24,617

|

  
  
  
Employee benefit funded status adjustment (net of $(3,826) tax effect)

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

6,252

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

6,252

|

  
  
  
Foreign currency translation

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

172

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

172

|

  
  
  
Cash dividends of $0.70 per share

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(9,993

|

)

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

(9,993

|

)  
  
Stock options exercised

|

63

|

  

|

|

1,577

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,640

|

  
  
  
Tax benefit on stock options and dividends

|

--

|

  

|

|

382

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

382

|

  
  
  
ESSOP transactions

|

--

|

  

|

|

201

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

159

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

360

|

  
  
  
Stock-based compensation

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,388

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,388

|

  
  
  
Issuance of treasury stock (35 shares)

|

--

|

  

|

|

324

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

174

|

  

|

|

498

|

  
  
  
Balance, December 31, 2013

|

$

|

20,504

|

  

|

|

$

|

45,627

|

  

|

|

$

|

170,318

|

  

|

|

$

|

(7,524

|

)

|

|

$

|

(1,075

|

)

|

|

$

|

(31,287

|

)

|

|

$

|

196,563

|

  
  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
*

|

Each common share of stock equals $1 par value; therefore, the number of
common shares is the same as the dollar value.  
  
  

See accompanying notes.

  

30

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

  

Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies

  

Profile

An innovator in flow measurement and control products, the Company serves
water utilities, municipalities, and commercial and industrial customers
worldwide. Measuring water, oil, chemicals and other fluids, the Company's
products are known for accuracy, long-lasting durability and for providing
valuable and timely measurement data. The Company's product lines fall into
three categories: sales of water meters and related technologies to municipal
water utilities (municipal water), sales of meters to various industries for
water and other fluids (industrial flow), and sales of gas meter radios and
concrete vibrators to unique markets (specialty products). The Company
estimates that over 75% of its products are used in water applications when
all categories are grouped together.

Municipal water, the largest category by sales volume, includes mechanical and
electronic (static) water meters and related technologies and services used by
water utilities as the basis for generating water and wastewater revenues. The
key market for the Company's water meter products is North America, primarily
the United States, because most meters are designed and manufactured to
conform to standards promulgated by the American Water Works Association.
Sales of water meters and related technologies and services are commonly
referred to as residential or commercial water meter sales, the latter
referring to larger sizes of meters.

  

Industrial flow includes products sold worldwide to measure and control
materials flowing through a pipe or pipeline including water, air, steam, oil,
and other liquids and gases. These meters and valves are used in a variety of
applications, such as water/wastewater; heating, ventilating and air
conditioning (HVAC); oil and gas; chemical and petrochemical; food and
beverage; and pharmaceutical production.

Specialty products include sales of radio technology to natural gas utilities
for installation on their gas meters, and concrete vibrators.

  

Consolidation

The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and
its wholly owned subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions have been
eliminated in consolidation.

  

Receivables

  

Receivables consist primarily of trade receivables. The Company does not
require collateral or other security and evaluates the collectability of its
receivables based on a number of factors. An allowance for doubtful accounts
is recorded for significant past due receivable balances based on a review of
the past due items and the customer's ability and likelihood to pay, as well
as applying a historical write-off ratio to the remaining balances. Changes in
the Company's allowance for doubtful accounts are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Balance at

beginning

of year

|

|

Provision

and reserve

adjustments

|

|

Write-offs

less

recoveries

|

|

Reserve

acquired

|

|

Balance

at end

of year  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
2013

|

$

|

488

|

  

|

|

$

|

78

|

  

|

|

$

|

(35

|

)

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

531

|

  
  
  
2012

|

$

|

298

|

  

|

|

$

|

138

|

  

|

|

$

|

(30

|

)

|

|

$

|

82

|

  

|

(a)

|

$

|

488

|

  
  
  
2011

|

$

|

441

|

  

|

|

$

|

91

|

  

|

|

$

|

(274

|

)

|

|

$

|

40

|

  

|

(b)

|

$

|

298

|

  
  
  
  

(a) The reserve increased $82,000 in 2012 related to the acquisition of Racine
Federated Inc. Refer to Note 3 "Acquisitions" for a description of the
acquisition.

(b) The reserve increased $40,000 in 2011 related to the acquisition of Remag
AG. Refer to Note 3 "Acquisitions" for a description of the acquisition.

  

  

  

  

31

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

Inventories

Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined
using the first-in, first-out method. The Company estimates and records
provisions for obsolete inventories. Changes to the Company's obsolete
inventories reserve are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Balance at

beginning

of year

|

|

Net additions

charged to

earnings

|

|

Disposals

|

|

Balance

at end

of year  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
2013

|

$

|

2,880

|

  

|

|

$

|

2,322

|

  

|

|

$

|

(966

|

)

|

|

$

|

4,236

|

  
  
  
2012

|

$

|

2,680

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,082

|

  

|

|

$

|

(882

|

)

|

|

$

|

2,880

|

  
  
  
2011

|

$

|

2,775

|

  

|

|

$

|

328

|

  

|

|

$

|

(423

|

)

|

|

$

|

2,680

|

  
  
  
  

Property, Plant and Equipment

  

Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is provided
over the estimated useful lives of the respective assets by the straight-line
method. The estimated useful lives of assets are: for land improvements, 15
years; for buildings and improvements, 10 -- 39 years; and for machinery and
equipment, 3 -- 20 years.

  

Long-Lived Assets

  

Property, plant and equipment and identifiable intangible assets are reviewed
for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the sum of the expected
undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the related asset
or group of assets, a loss is recognized for the difference between the fair
value and carrying value of the asset or group of assets. No adjustments were
recorded as a result of these reviews during 2013, 2012 and 2011.

  

Intangible Assets

  

Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated
useful lives ranging from 5 to 20 years. The Company does not have any
intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives. Amortization expense
recognized for the years ending December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $5.0
million, $4.5 million and $2.3 million, respectively. Amortization expense
expected to be recognized is $5.0 million in each of the subsequent four years
beginning with 2014, $4.9 million in 2018 and $32.4 million thereafter. The
carrying value and accumulated amortization by major class of intangible
assets are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

December 31, 2013

|

|

December 31, 2012  
  
|

Gross carrying

amount

|

|

Accumulated

amortization

|

|

Gross carrying

amount

|

|

Accumulated

amortization  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Technologies

|

$

|

47,157

|

  

|

|

$

|

10,384

|

  

|

|

$

|

43,828

|

  

|

|

$

|

7,609

|

  
  
  
Non-compete agreements

|

1,932

|

  

|

|

1,048

|

  

|

|

1,932

|

  

|

|

862

|

  
  
  
Licenses

|

650

|

  

|

|

407

|

  

|

|

650

|

  

|

|

390

|

  
  
  
Customer lists

|

3,423

|

  

|

|

679

|

  

|

|

3,423

|

  

|

|

483

|

  
  
  
Customer relationships

|

11,690

|

  

|

|

2,218

|

  

|

|

11,500

|

  

|

|

1,054

|

  
  
  
Trade names

|

8,615

|

  

|

|

1,414

|

  

|

|

8,223

|

  

|

|

807

|

  
  
  
Total intangibles

|

$

|

73,467

|

  

|

|

$

|

16,150

|

  

|

|

$

|

69,556

|

  

|

|

$

|

11,205

|

  
  
  
  

Goodwill

Goodwill is tested for impairment annually during the fourth fiscal quarter or
more frequently if an event indicates that the goodwill might be impaired.
Potential impairment is identified by comparing the fair value of a reporting
unit with its carrying value. No adjustments were recorded to goodwill as a
result of these reviews during 2013, 2012 and 2011.

  

32

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

  

Goodwill was $44.7 million, $35.9 million and $9.4 million at December 31,
2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The increases were the result of the
Aquacue, Inc. of Los Gatos, California acquisition in 2013, the Racine
Federated, Inc. of Racine, Wisconsin acquisition in 2012 and the Remag, AG of
Bern, Switzerland acquisition in 2011. These acquisitions are further
described in Note 3 "Acquisitions."

  

Revenue Recognition

Revenues are generally recognized upon shipment of product, which corresponds
with the transfer of title. The costs of shipping are billed to the customer
upon shipment and are included in cost of sales. A small portion of the
Company's sales includes shipments of products combined with services, such as
meters sold with installation. The product and installation components of
these multiple deliverable arrangements are considered separate units of
accounting. The value of these separate units of accounting is determined
based on their relative fair values determined on a stand-alone basis. Revenue
is generally recognized when the last element of the multiple deliverable is
delivered, which corresponds with installation and acceptance by the customer.
The Company also sells a small number of extended support service agreements
on certain products for the period subsequent to the normal support service
provided with the original product sale. Revenue is recognized over the
service agreement period, which is generally one year.

  

Warranty and After-Sale Costs

The Company estimates and records provisions for warranties and other after-
sale costs in the period in which the sale is recorded, based on a lag factor
and historical warranty claim experience. After-sale costs represent a variety
of activities outside of the written warranty policy, such as investigation of
unanticipated problems after the customer has installed the product, or
analysis of water quality issues. Changes in the Company's warranty and after-
sale costs reserve are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Balance at

beginning

of year

|

|

Net additions

charged to

earnings

|

|

|

|

Costs

incurred and

adjustments

|

|

Reserve

acquired

|

|

|

|

Balance

at end

of year  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
2013

|

$

|

881

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,005

|

  

|

|

|

|

$

|

(1,068

|

)

|

|

$

|

64

|

  

|

|

(a)

|

|

$

|

882

|

  
  
  
2012

|

$

|

1,593

|

  

|

|

$

|

719

|

  

|

|

|

|

$

|

(1,431

|

)

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

|

|

$

|

881

|

  
  
  
2011

|

$

|

889

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,592

|

  

|

|

(b)

|

|

$

|

(888

|

)

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

|

|

$

|

1,593

|

  
  
  
|  
---|---  
  
(a)

|

The reserve increased $64,000 in 2013 related to the acquisition of Aquacue,
Inc. Refer to Note 3 "Acquisitions" for a description of the acquisition.  
  
|  
---|---  
  
(b)

|

Included in the 2011 increase in the reserve was $0.6 million related to a
specific product issue.  
  
  

Research and Development

Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred and amounted
to $10.5 million, $9.6 million and $8.1 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011,
respectively.

  

Stock-Based Compensation Plans

As of December 31, 2013, the Company has an Omnibus Incentive Plan under which
700,000 shares are reserved for restricted stock and stock options grants for
employees as well as stock grants for directors as described in Note 5 "Stock
Compensation." The plan was approved in 2011 and replaced all prior stock-
based plans except for shares and options previously issued under those plans.

  

The Company recognizes the cost of stock-based awards in net earnings for all
of its stock-based compensation plans on a straight-line basis over the
service period of the awards. The Company estimates the fair value of its
option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing formula, and records
compensation expense for stock options ratably over the stock option grant's
vesting period. The Company values restricted stock and stock grants for
directors on the closing price of the Company's stock on the day the grant was
awarded. Total stock compensation expense recognized by the Company was $1.4
million for 2013, $1.3 million for 2012 and $1.5 million for 2011.

  

  

33

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

Healthcare

The Company estimates and records provisions for healthcare claims incurred
but not reported, based on medical cost trend analyses, reviews of subsequent
payments made and estimates of unbilled amounts.

  

Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss

Components of accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31 are as
follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Unrecognized pension and postretirement benefits

|

|

Foreign currency

|

|

Total  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Balance at beginning of period

|

$

|

(15,532

|

)

|

|

$

|

1,584

|

  

|

|

$

|

(13,948

|

)  
  
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications

|

5,116

|

  

|

|

172

|

  

|

|

5,288

|

  
  
  
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax of
$(0.6) million

|

1,136

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,136

|

  
  
  
Net current period other comprehensive income, net

|

6,252

|

  

|

|

172

|

  

|

|

6,424

|

  
  
  
Accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income

|

$

|

(9,280

|

)

|

|

$

|

1,756

|

  

|

|

$

|

(7,524

|

)  
  
  

Details of reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive loss
during 2013 are as follows:  
  
---  
| | |  
  
|

Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Amortization of employee benefit plan items:

|  
  
Prior service cost (1)

|

$

|

161

|

  
  
  
Settlement expense (1)

|

806

|

  
  
  
Amortization of actuarial loss (1)

|

786

|

  
  
  
Total before tax

|

1,753

|

  
  
  
Income tax benefit

|

(617

|

)  
  
Amount reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive loss

|

$

|

1,136

|

  
  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
(1)

|

These accumulated other comprehensive loss components are included in the
computation of benefit plan costs in Note 7 "Employee Benefit Plans."  
  
  

Use of Estimates

The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally
accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and
accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.

  

Fair Value Measurements of Financial Instruments

  

The carrying amounts of cash, receivables and payables in the financial
statements approximate their fair values due to the short-term nature of these
financial instruments. Short-term debt is comprised of notes payable drawn
against the Company's lines of credit and commercial paper. Because of its
short-term nature, the carrying amount of the short-term debt also
approximates fair value. Included in other assets are insurance policies on
various individuals who were associated with the Company. The carrying amounts
of these insurance policies approximate their fair value.

  

  

  

  

  

34

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

Subsequent Events

  

The Company evaluates subsequent events at the date of the balance sheet as
well as conditions that arise after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued. The effects of conditions that existed at the
date of the balance sheet date are recognized in the financial statements.
Events and conditions arising after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued are evaluated to determine if disclosure is
required to keep the financial statements from being misleading. To the extent
such events and conditions exist, if any, disclosures are made regarding the
nature of events and the estimated financial effects for those events and
conditions. For purposes of preparing the accompanying consolidated financial
statements and the notes to these financial statements, the Company evaluated
subsequent events through the date the accompanying financial statements were
issued.

Note 2 Common Stock

  

Common Stock and Rights Agreement

  

The Company has Common Stock and also Common Share Purchase Rights that trade
with the Common Stock. The Common Share Purchase Rights were issued pursuant
to the shareholder rights plan discussed below.

On February 15, 2008, the Board of Directors of the Company adopted a
shareholder rights plan and declared a dividend of one Common Share Purchase
Right for each outstanding share of Common Stock of the Company payable to the
shareholders of record on May 26, 2008. The plan was effective as of May 27,
2008. Each right entitles the registered holder to purchase from the Company
one share of Common Stock at a price of $200.00 per share, subject to
adjustment. Subject to certain conditions, the rights are redeemable by the
Company and are exchangeable for shares of Common Stock at a favorable price.
The rights have no voting power and unless the rights are redeemed, exchanged
or terminated earlier, they will expire on May 26, 2018. The rights are an
embedded feature of the Company's Common Stock and not a free-standing
instrument, and therefore, do not require separate accounting treatment.

  

In 2012, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase
program up to $30.0 million in shares of Common Stock in the open market for a
period of two years ending February 10, 2014, if not terminated sooner. At
December 31, 2012, 888,056 shares were repurchased aggregating $30.0 million,
which completed this program.

  

Stock Options

Stock options to purchase 23,258, 60,400 and 137,720 shares of the Company's
Stock in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively, were not included in the
computation of dilutive securities because the exercise price was greater than
the average stock price for that period, and accordingly their inclusion would
have been anti-dilutive.

  

Note 3 Acquisitions

  

On April 1, 2013, the Company acquired 100.00% of the outstanding common stock
of Aquacue, Inc. ("Aquacue") of Los Gatos, California. The Aquacue acquisition
provides the Company with intellectual property that complements and expands
the Company's advanced metering analytics offerings by adding an integrated
software platform that allows utility managers to monitor and control their
water systems, while providing water management data to consumers. Sales of
Aquacue products were immaterial for 2013.

  

The purchase price was $13.8 million in cash, including a small working
capital adjustment. The purchase price included a final $3.0 million payment,
of which half was due January 10, 2014 and half is due October 10, 2014, and
these amounts were recorded in payables on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at
December 31, 2013. The Company's allocation of the purchase price as of
December 31, 2013 included $0.1 million of current assets, $1.3 million of
deferred tax assets, $3.9 million of intangibles, $8.8 million of goodwill and
$0.3 million of current liabilities. As of December 31, 2013, the Company has
completed its analysis for estimating the fair value of the assets acquired
and liabilities assumed. The intangible assets acquired are primarily
developed technology with an estimated average useful life of 10 years. There
was approximately $0.1 million of transaction costs related to the acquisition
that were included in selling, engineering and administration for 2013 in the
Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations. The Company merged Aquacue
into Badger Meter, Inc. on December 31, 2013.

  

  

35

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The acquisition was accounted for under the purchase method, and accordingly,
the results of operations were included in the Company's financial statements
from the date of acquisition. The acquisition did not have a material impact
on the Company's consolidated financial statements or the notes thereto.

  

On January 31, 2012, the Company completed its acquisition of 100% of the
outstanding common stock of Racine Federated, Inc. of Racine, Wisconsin and
its subsidiary Premier Control Technologies, Ltd. ("PCT") located in Thetford,
England for approximately $57.3 million in cash, plus a working capital
adjustment of $0.3 million. The purchase price included a final $4.6 million
payment which was due on July 31, 2013 and included in payables at December
31, 2012. Racine Federated manufactures and markets flow meters for the water
industry as well as various industrial metering and specialty products. These
products complement and expand the Company's existing lines for the global
flow measurement business.

The acquisition was accounted for under the purchase method, and accordingly,
the results of operations are included in the Company's financial statements
from the date of acquisition. During the fourth quarter of 2012, the Company
sold PCT for a nominal amount after the majority of its functions were
absorbed by the Company's European subsidiary. The Company also merged Racine
Federated into Badger Meter, Inc. on December 31, 2012.

  

The following table summarizes the fair value of the assets acquired and the
liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date:  
  
---  
| | |  
  
|

January 31, 2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Assets acquired:

|  
  
Cash

|

$

|

1,529

|

  
  
  
Receivables

|

5,230

|

  
  
  
Inventories

|

7,603

|

  
  
  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets

|

164

|

  
  
  
Current deferred income taxes

|

247

|

  
  
  
Property, plant and equipment

|

3,772

|

  
  
  
Intangible assets

|

29,100

|

  
  
  
Goodwill

|

26,565

|

  
  
  
Total assets acquired

|

$

|

74,210

|

  
  
  
|  
  
Liabilities assumed:

|  
  
Payables

|

$

|

2,920

|

  
  
  
Accrued compensation and employee benefits

|

1,785

|

  
  
  
Long-term deferred income taxes

|

11,457

|

  
  
  
Other long-term liabilities

|

451

|

  
  
  
Total liabilities assumed

|

$

|

16,613

|

  
  
  
The intangible assets acquired are primarily customer relationships and
developed technology with an estimated average useful life of 10 and 15 years,
respectively.

The following unaudited pro forma information combines historical results as
if Racine Federated had been owned by the Company for the twelve-month periods
presented.  
  
---  
| | | | | |  
  
|

2012

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands except per share amounts)  
  
Net sales

|

$

|

323,516

|

  

|

$

|

305,562

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

$

|

28,177

|

  

|

$

|

21,261

|

  
  
  
Diluted earnings per share

|

$

|

1.96

|

  

|

$

|

1.41

|

  
  
  
  

36

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The pro forma results include amortization of the intangibles mentioned above,
interest expense on debt incurred to finance the acquisition, the elimination
of certain acquisition costs and the income tax effect on the pro forma
adjustments. The pro forma results are not necessarily indicative of what
would have occurred if the acquisition had been completed as of the beginning
of each fiscal period presented, nor are they necessarily indicative of future
consolidated results.

On January 26, 2011, the Company purchased Remag AG of Bern, Switzerland for
$4.9 million. Remag manufactures and markets a small plastic turbine meter
used in HVAC and white goods. The Company included these products with its
other industrial flow products. The Company's purchase price allocation
included $0.9 million of cash, plus approximately $0.4 million of receivables,
$0.4 million of inventory, $0.3 million of other assets, $2.0 million of fixed
assets, $1.8 million of intangibles, $0.2 million of goodwill and $1.1 million
of liabilities.

The Remag acquisition was accounted for under the purchase method, and
accordingly, the results of operations were included in the Company's
financial statements from the date of acquisition. The acquisition did not
have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements or
the notes thereto.

  

Note 4 Short-term Debt and Credit Lines

  

Short-term debt at December 31, 2013 and 2012 consisted of:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Notes payable to banks

|

$

|

4,795

|

  

|

|

$

|

3,300

|

  
  
  
Commercial paper

|

65,250

|

  

|

|

63,430

|

  
  
  
Total short-term debt

|

$

|

70,045

|

  

|

|

$

|

66,730

|

  
  
  
Included in notes payable to banks was $4.8 million outstanding in 2013 under
a 4.0 million Euro-base revolving loan facility (U.S. dollar equivalent of
$5.5 million at December 31, 2013) that does not expire, and which bore
interest at 1.72%. In 2012, included in notes payable to banks was $3.3
million outstanding under a 4.0 million Euro-based revolving loan facility
(U.S. dollar equivalent of $5.3 million at December 31, 2012) which bore
interest at 1.56%.

On May 23, 2012, the Company signed a new credit agreement which increased its
principal line of credit (increasing it from $90.0 million to $125.0 million)
for a three year period. The line is permanently reduced by $16.7 million
annually beginning in 2013. The line was increased to meet short-term cash
needs, if any, that may arise as the result of funding the acquisition of
Racine Federated with cash, as well as any cash needs resulting from the $30.0
million stock repurchase program that began in the first quarter of 2012 and
ended in the second quarter of 2012. The issuance of commercial paper may
comprise a maximum of $70.0 million of the line of credit. Borrowings of
commercial paper bore interest at 1.25% in 2013 and 1.35% in 2012. While the
facility is unsecured, there are a number of financial covenants in effect for
the period with which the Company is in compliance. Under the principal line
of credit at December 31, 2013, the Company has $43.1 million available out of
its total $47.8 million available short-term credit lines.

  

Note 5 Stock Compensation

As of December 31, 2013, the Company has an Omnibus Incentive Plan under which
700,000 shares are reserved for restricted stock and stock options grants for
employees as well as stock grants for directors. The plan was approved in 2011
and replaced all prior stock-based plans except for shares and options
previously issued under those plans. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, there
were 505,000 shares and 552,000 shares of the Company's Common Stock available
for grant under the 2011 Omnibus Incentive Plan. The Company recognizes the
cost of stock-based awards in net earnings for all of its stock-based
compensation plans on a straight-line basis over the service period of the
awards. The following sections describe the three types of grants in more
detail.

  

Stock Options

  

The Company estimates the fair value of its option awards using the Black-
Scholes option-pricing formula, and records compensation expense for stock
options ratably over the stock option grant's vesting period. Stock option

  

37

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

compensation expense recognized by the Company for the year ended December 31,
2013 related to stock options was $0.5 million compared to $0.4 million in
2012 and $0.4 million in 2011.

The following table summarizes the transactions of the Company's stock option
plans for the three-year period ended December 31, 2013:  
  
---  
| | | | | |  
  
|

Number of shares

|

|

Weighted-average

exercise price  
  
Options outstanding --

|

|

|  
  
December 31, 2010

|

251,250

|

  

|

|

$

|

26.59

|

  
  
  
Options granted

|

31,500

|

  

|

|

$

|

36.59

|

  
  
  
Options exercised

|

(33,180

|

)

|

|

$

|

7.07

|

  
  
  
Options forfeited

|

(4,480

|

)

|

|

38.20

|

  
  
  
Options outstanding --

|

|

|  
  
December 31, 2011

|

245,090

|

  

|

|

$

|

30.30

|

  
  
  
Options granted

|

45,100

|

  

|

|

$

|

36.15

|

  
  
  
Options exercised

|

(37,450

|

)

|

|

$

|

10.25

|

  
  
  
Options forfeited

|

(5,160

|

)

|

|

$

|

37.19

|

  
  
  
Options outstanding --

|

|

|  
  
December 31, 2012

|

247,580

|

  

|

|

$

|

34.26

|

  
  
  
Options granted

|

23,258

|

  

|

|

$

|

51.29

|

  
  
  
Options exercised

|

(66,660

|

)

|

|

$

|

24.91

|

  
  
  
Options forfeited

|

(1,800

|

)

|

|

$

|

37.78

|

  
  
  
Options outstanding --

|

|

|  
  
December 31, 2013

|

202,378

|

  

|

|

$

|

39.27

|

  
  
  
Price range $9.14 -- $36.15

|

|

|  
  
(weighted-average contractual life of 6.3 years)

|

67,560

|

  

|

|

$

|

32.58

|

  
  
  
Price range $36.16 -- $38.41

|

|

|  
  
(weighted-average contractual life of 6.8 years)

|

57,260

|

  

|

|

$

|

37.57

|

  
  
  
Price range $38.42 -- $52.81

|

|

|  
  
(weighted-average contractual life of 6.2 years)

|

77,558

|

  

|

|

$

|

46.35

|

  
  
  
Options outstanding - December 31, 2013

|

202,378

|

  

|

|  
  
Exercisable options --

|

|

|  
  
December 31, 2011

|

152,762

|

  

|

|

$

|

25.29

|

  
  
  
December 31, 2012

|

141,740

|

  

|

|

$

|

31.72

|

  
  
  
December 31, 2013

|

113,060

|

  

|

|

$

|

38.18

|

  
  
  
The following assumptions were used for valuing options granted in the years
ended December 31:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
Per share fair value of options granted during the period

|

$20.34

|

|

$13.17  
  
Risk-free interest rate

|

0.82

|

%

|

|

0.85

|

%  
  
Dividend yield

|

1.31

|

%

|

|

1.77

|

%  
  
Volatility factor

|

49.7

|

%

|

|

49.7

|

%  
  
Weighted-average expected life in years

|

5.3

|

  

|

|

5.3

|

  
  
  
  

  

38

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The expected life is based on historical exercise behavior and the projected
exercise of unexercised stock options. The risk-free interest rate is based on
the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect on the date of grant for the
respective expected life of the option. The expected dividend yield is based
on the expected annual dividends divided by the grant date market value of the
Company's Common Stock. The expected volatility is based on the historical
volatility of the Company's Common Stock.

  

The following table summarizes the aggregate intrinsic value related to
options exercised, outstanding and exercisable as of and for the years ended
December 31:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Exercised

|

$

|

1,743

|

  

|

|

$

|

950

|

  
  
  
Outstanding

|

$

|

3,083

|

  

|

|

$

|

3,371

|

  
  
  
Exercisable

|

$

|

1,846

|

  

|

|

$

|

2,316

|

  
  
  
As of December 31, 2013, the unrecognized compensation cost related to stock
options was approximately $1.0 million, which will be recognized over a
weighted average period of 2.3 years.

  

Director Stock Grant

  

Non-employee directors receive an annual award of $50,000 worth of shares of
the Company's Common Stock under the shareholder-approved 2011 Omnibus
Incentive Plan. The Company values stock grants for directors on the closing
price of the Company's stock on the day the grant was awarded. The Company
records compensation expense for this plan ratably over the annual service
period beginning May 1\. Director stock compensation expense recognized by the
Company for the year ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $0.4 million
in each year. As of December 31, 2013, the unrecognized compensation cost
related to the director stock award that is expected to be recognized over the
remaining four months is estimated to be approximately $0.1 million.

  

Restricted Stock

  

The Company periodically issues nonvested shares of the Company's Common Stock
to certain eligible employees, generally with a three-year cliff vesting
period contingent on employment. The Company values restricted stock on the
closing price of the Company's stock on the day the grant was awarded. The
Company records compensation expense for these plans ratably over the vesting
periods. Nonvested stock compensation expense recognized by the Company for
the year ended December 31, 2013 was $0.9 million compared to $0.9 million in
2012 and $0.7 million in 2011.

  

The fair value of nonvested shares is determined based on the market price of
the shares on the grant date.  
  
---  
| | | | | |  
  
|

Shares

|

|

Fair value

per share  
  
Nonvested at December 31, 2010

|

47,900

|

  

|

|

$

|

41.52

|

  
  
  
Granted

|

28,650

|

  

|

|

$

|

36.59

|

  
  
  
Vested

|

(10,900

|

)

|

|

$

|

51.26

|

  
  
  
Forfeited

|

(2,350

|

)

|

|

$

|

39.30

|

  
  
  
Nonvested at December 31, 2011

|

63,300

|

  

|

|

$

|

37.69

|

  
  
  
Granted

|

30,325

|

  

|

|

$

|

36.15

|

  
  
  
Vested

|

(17,900

|

)

|

|

$

|

38.69

|

  
  
  
Forfeited

|

(1,900

|

)

|

|

$

|

21.77

|

  
  
  
Nonvested at December 31, 2012

|

73,825

|

  

|

|

$

|

37.01

|

  
  
  
Granted

|

21,425

|

  

|

|

$

|

51.12

|

  
  
  
Vested

|

(16,875

|

)

|

|

$

|

38.41

|

  
  
  
Forfeited

|

(3,900

|

)

|

|

$

|

37.69

|

  
  
  
Nonvested at December 31, 2013

|

74,475

|

  

|

|

$

|

40.54

|

  
  
  
  

39

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

  

As of December 31, 2013, there was $1.3 million of unrecognized compensation
cost related to nonvested restricted stock that is expected to be recognized
over a weighted average period of 1.3 years.

  

Note 6 Commitments and Contingencies

  

Commitments

  

The Company leases equipment and facilities under non-cancelable operating
leases, some of which contain renewal options. Total future minimum lease
payments consisted of the following at December 31, 2013:  
  
---  
| | |  
  
|

Total leases  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
2014

|

$

|

1,681

|

  
  
  
2015

|

1,459

|

  
  
  
2016

|

1,087

|

  
  
  
2017

|

1,030

|

  
  
  
2018

|

964

|

  
  
  
Thereafter

|

6,670

|

  
  
  
Total lease obligations

|

$

|

12,891

|

  
  
  
  

Total rental expense charged to operations under all operating leases was $2.8
million, $2.7 million and $1.7 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.

  

The Company makes commitments in the normal course of business. At December
31, 2013, the Company had various contractual obligations, specifically
operating leases that totaled $12.9 million, of which $1.7 million is due in
2014 and the remainder due between 2015 and 2025.

  

Contingencies

  

In the normal course of business, the Company is named in legal proceedings.
There are currently no material legal proceedings pending with respect to the
Company. The more significant legal proceedings are discussed below.

  

The Company is subject to contingencies related to environmental laws and
regulations. The Company is named as one of many potentially responsible
parties in two landfill lawsuits. The landfill sites are impacted by the
Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
and other environmental laws and regulations. At this time, the Company does
not believe the ultimate resolution of these matters will have a material
adverse effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations,
either from a cash flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.
This belief is based on the Company's assessment of its limited past
involvement with these landfill sites as well as the substantial involvement
of and government focus on other named third parties with these landfill
sites. However, due to the inherent uncertainties of such proceedings, the
Company cannot predict the ultimate outcome of any of these matters. A future
change in circumstances with respect to these specific matters or with respect
to sites formerly or currently owned or operated by the Company, off-site
disposal locations used by the Company, and property owned by third parties
that is near such sites, could result in future costs to the Company and such
amounts could be material. Expenditures for compliance with environmental
control provisions and regulations during 2013, 2012 and 2011 were not
material.

Like other companies in recent years, the Company is named as a defendant in
numerous pending multi-claimant/multi-defendant lawsuits alleging personal
injury as a result of exposure to asbestos, manufactured by third parties, and
integrated into or sold with a very limited number of the Company's products.
The Company is vigorously defending itself against these claims. Although it
is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters, the Company
does not believe the ultimate resolution of these issues will have a material
adverse effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations,
either from a cash flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.
This belief is based in part on the fact that no claimant has proven or
substantially demonstrated asbestos exposure caused by products manufactured
or sold by the Company and that a number of cases have been voluntarily
dismissed.

  

  

40

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The Company relies on single suppliers for most brass castings and certain
electronic subassemblies in several of its product lines. The Company believes
these items would be available from other sources, but that the loss of
certain suppliers would result in a higher cost of materials, delivery delays,
short-term increases in inventory and higher quality control costs in the
short term. The Company attempts to mitigate these risks by working closely
with key suppliers, purchasing minimal amounts from alternative suppliers and
by purchasing business interruption insurance where appropriate.

  

The Company reevaluates its exposures on a periodic basis and makes
adjustments to reserves as appropriate.

  

Note 7 Employee Benefit Plans

The Company maintains a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan that
covers substantially all U.S. employees who were employed at December 31,
2011. After that date, no further benefits are being accrued in this plan. The
Company also maintains supplemental non-qualified pension plans for certain
officers and other key employees, and an Employee Savings and Stock Option
Plan ("ESSOP"). For the frozen pension plan, benefits are based primarily on
years of service and, for certain plans, levels of compensation.

  

The Company also has a postretirement healthcare benefit plan that provides
medical benefits for certain U.S. retirees and eligible dependents hired prior
to November 1, 2004. Employees are eligible to receive postretirement
healthcare benefits upon meeting certain age and service requirements. No
employees hired after October 31, 2004 are eligible to receive these benefits.
This plan requires employee contributions to offset benefit costs.

  

Amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax, at
December 31, 2013 that have not yet been recognized in net periodic benefit
cost are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

Pension

plans

|

|

Other

postretirement

benefits  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Prior service cost

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

93

|

  
  
  
Net actuarial loss

|

$

|

9,157

|

  

|

|

$

|

30

|

  
  
  
Amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax, at
December 31, 2013 expected to be recognized in net periodic benefit cost
during the fiscal year ending December 31, 2014 are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

Pension

plans

|

|

Other

postretirement

benefits  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Prior service credit

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

99

|

  
  
  
Net actuarial loss

|

$

|

378

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  
  
  
  

Qualified Pension Plan

The Company maintains a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan
(sometimes referred to as the "qualified pension plan") for certain employees.
On December 31, 2010, the Company froze the qualified pension plan for its
non-union participants and formed a new defined contribution feature within
the ESSOP plan in which each employee received a similar benefit. On December
31, 2011, the Company froze the qualified pension plan for its union
participants and included them in the same defined contribution feature within
the ESSOP. After December 31, 2011, employees receive no future benefits under
the qualified pension benefit plan as benefits were frozen and the employees
now receive a defined contribution in its place. Employees will continue to
earn returns on their frozen balances.

  

  

  

  

  

41

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The following table sets forth the components of net periodic pension cost for
the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 based on a December 31
measurement date:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Service cost -- benefits earned during the year

|

$

|

5

|

  

|

|

$

|

6

|

  

|

|

$

|

464

|

  
  
  
Interest cost on projected benefit obligations

|

1,842

|

  

|

|

2,205

|

  

|

|

2,415

|

  
  
  
Expected return on plan assets

|

(2,744

|

)

|

|

(3,190

|

)

|

|

(3,767

|

)  
  
Amortization of prior service cost

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

196

|

  
  
  
Amortization of net loss

|

719

|

  

|

|

645

|

  

|

|

1,698

|

  
  
  
Curtailment expense

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

984

|

  
  
  
Settlement expense

|

806

|

  

|

|

1,075

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Net periodic pension cost

|

$

|

628

|

  

|

|

$

|

741

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,990

|

  
  
  
Actuarial assumptions used in the determination of the net periodic pension
cost are:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
Discount rate

|

3.68

|

%

|

|

4.69

|

%

|

|

5.05

|

%  
  
Expected long-term return on plan assets

|

6.50

|

%

|

|

7.00

|

%

|

|

7.75

|

%  
  
Rate of compensation increase

|

n/a

|

  

|

|

n/a

|

  

|

|

5.0

|

%  
  
  

The Company's discount rate assumptions for the qualified pension plan are
based on the average yield of a hypothetical high quality bond portfolio with
maturities that approximately match the estimated cash flow needs of the plan.
The assumptions for expected long-term rates of return on assets are based on
historical experience and estimated future investment returns, taking into
consideration anticipated asset allocations, investment strategies and the
views of various investment professionals. The use of these assumptions can
cause volatility if actual results differ from expected results.

  

  

42

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The following table provides a reconciliation of benefit obligations, plan
assets and funded status based on a December 31 measurement date:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Change in benefit obligation:

|

|

|  
  
Benefit obligation at beginning of plan year

|

$

|

50,700

|

  

|

|

$

|

49,009

|

  
  
  
Service cost

|

5

|

  

|

|

6

|

  
  
  
Interest cost

|

1,842

|

  

|

|

2,205

|

  
  
  
Actuarial (gain)/loss

|

(3,208

|

)

|

|

3,565

|

  
  
  
Benefits paid

|

(3,778

|

)

|

|

(4,085

|

)  
  
Projected benefit obligation at measurement date

|

$

|

45,561

|

  

|

|

$

|

50,700

|

  
  
  
|

|

|  
  
Change in plan assets:

|

|

|  
  
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of plan year

|

$

|

46,547

|

  

|

|

$

|

43,852

|

  
  
  
Actual return on plan assets

|

7,104

|

  

|

|

5,683

|

  
  
  
Company contributions

|

--

|

  

|

|

1,097

|

  
  
  
Benefits paid

|

(3,778

|

)

|

|

(4,085

|

)  
  
Fair value of plan assets at measurement date

|

$

|

49,873

|

  

|

|

$

|

46,547

|

  
  
  
|

|

|  
  
Funded status of the plan:

|

|

|  
  
Benefit obligation in excess of plan assets

|

4,312

|

  

|

|

(4,153

|

)  
  
Prepaid pension asset (accrued pension liability)

|

$

|

4,312

|

  

|

|

$

|

(4,153

|

)  
  
The actuarial assumption used in the determination of the benefit obligation
of the above data is:  
  
---  
| | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
Discount rate

|

4.47

|

%

|

|

3.68

|

%  
  
The fair value of the qualified pension plan assets was $49.9 million at
December 31, 2013 and $46.5 million at December 31, 2012. The variation in the
fair value of the assets between years was due to the change in the market
value of the underlying investments and benefits paid. Estimated future
benefit payments expected to be paid in each of the next five years beginning
with 2014 are $4.5 million, $4.1 million, $3.8 million, $3.8 million and $3.7
million, with an aggregate of $15.9 million for the five years thereafter. As
of the most recent actuarial measurement date, the Company is not required to
make a minimum contribution for the 2014 calendar year.

The Company employs a total return investment approach whereby a mix of
equities and fixed income investments are used to maximize the long-term
return of plan assets for a prudent level of risk. Risk tolerance is
established through careful consideration of short- and long-term plan
liabilities, plan funded status and corporate financial condition. The
investment portfolio contains a diversified blend of equity and fixed-income
investments. Furthermore, equity investments are diversified across various
stocks, as well as growth, value, and small and large capitalizations.
Investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis through
quarterly investment portfolio reviews, annual liability measurements and
periodic asset/liability studies.

The expected role of plan equity investments is to maximize the long-term real
growth of fund assets, while the role of fixed income investments is to
generate current income, provide for more stable periodic returns and provide
some protection against a prolonged decline in the market value of fund equity
investments. The current target allocations for plan assets are 50%-70% for
equity securities, 20%-50% for fixed income securities, and 0%-15% for cash
and alternative investments. Equity securities include U.S. and international
equities, while fixed income securities include long-duration and high-yield
bond funds.

Accounting Standards Codification 820, "Fair Value Measurements and
Disclosures," establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs
to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. This hierarchy consists of
three broad levels:

  

43

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

Level 1 inputs consist of unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets and have the highest priority. Level 2 inputs consist of
inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for
the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. Level 3 inputs are
unobservable inputs for determining the fair value of assets or liabilities
that reflect assumptions that market participants would use in pricing assets
or liabilities. The plan uses appropriate valuation techniques based on the
available inputs to measure the fair value of its investments.

The fair value of the Company's qualified pension plan assets by category at
December 31, 2013 are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Market

value

|

|

Quoted

prices in active

markets for

identical assets

(Level 1)

|

|

Significant

observable

inputs

(Level 2)

|

|

Significant

unobservable

inputs

(Level 3)  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Equity securities (a)

|

$

|

27,049

|

  

|

|

$

|

27,049

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  
  
  
Fixed income funds (b)

|

18,990

|

  

|

|

18,990

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Cash/cash equivalents (c)

|

3,834

|

  

|

|

3,834

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Total

|

$

|

49,873

|

  

|

|

$

|

49,873

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  
  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
(a)

|

This category includes investments in equity securities of large, small and
medium sized companies, equity securities of foreign companies and equity
funds, or 52.8%, 11.1%, 12.1%, 17.2% and 6.8% of total equity securities,
respectively. Of the total equity amount, 11.1% was invested in common stocks
in a wide variety of industries and 88.9% was invested in mutual funds. The
funds are valued using the closing market prices at December 31, 2013.  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
(b)

|

This category includes investments in investment-grade fixed-income
instruments and corporate bonds. Government instruments were 33.4% of the
total. The funds are valued using the closing market prices at December 31,
2013.  
  
  

(c)This category comprises the cash held to pay beneficiaries. The fair value
of cash equals its book value.

The fair value of the Company's qualified pension plan assets by category at
December 31, 2012 are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Market

value

|

|

Quoted

prices in active

markets for

identical assets

(Level 1)

|

|

Significant

observable

inputs

(Level 2)

|

|

Significant

unobservable

inputs

(Level 3)  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Equity securities (a)

|

$

|

26,067

|

  

|

|

$

|

26,067

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  
  
  
Fixed income funds (b)

|

20,022

|

  

|

|

20,022

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Cash/cash equivalents (c)

|

458

|

  

|

|

458

|

  

|

|

--

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Total

|

$

|

46,547

|

  

|

|

$

|

46,547

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  

|

|

$

|

--

|

  
  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
(a)

|

This category includes investments in equity securities of large, small and
medium sized companies, equity securities of foreign companies and other, or
53.3%, 11.6%, 12.8%, 17.2% and 5.1% of total assets, respectively. Of the
total equity amount, 11.6% was invested in common stocks in a wide variety of
industries, 86.5% was invested in mutual funds and 1.9% was invested in
exchange traded funds. The funds are valued using the closing market prices at
December 31, 2012.  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
(b)

|

This category includes investments in investment-grade fixed-income
instruments and corporate bonds. The funds are valued using the closing market
prices at December 31, 2012.  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
(c)

|

This category comprises the cash held to pay beneficiaries. The fair value of
cash equals its book value.  
  
  

The pension plan has a separately determined accumulated benefit obligation
that is the actuarial present value of benefits based on service rendered and
current and past compensation levels. Prior to December 31, 2013, this
differed from the projected benefit obligation in that it included no
assumption about future compensation levels. The accumulated benefit
obligation was $45.6 million at December 31, 2013 and $50.7 million at
December 31, 2012.

  

44

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

  

Supplemental Non-qualified Unfunded Plans

  

The Company also maintains supplemental non-qualified unfunded plans for
certain officers and other key employees. Expense for these plans was $0.2
million for the year ended 2013 and $0.3 million for each of the years ended
2012 and 2011, and the amount accrued was $1.5 million and $1.6 million as of
December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Amounts were determined based on
similar assumptions as the qualified pension plan as of the December 31
measurement date for 2013 and 2012.

  

Other Postretirement Benefits

The Company has a postretirement plan that provides medical benefits for
certain U.S. retirees and eligible dependents hired prior to November 1, 2004.
The following table sets forth the components of net periodic postretirement
benefit cost for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Service cost, benefits attributed for service of active employees for the
period

|

$

|

154

|

  

|

|

$

|

143

|

  

|

|

$

|

148

|

  
  
  
Interest cost on the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation

|

255

|

  

|

|

295

|

  

|

|

313

|

  
  
  
Amortization of prior service cost

|

161

|

  

|

|

161

|

  

|

|

161

|

  
  
  
Net periodic postretirement benefit cost

|

$

|

570

|

  

|

|

$

|

599

|

  

|

|

$

|

622

|

  
  
  
The discount rate used to measure the net periodic postretirement benefit cost
was 3.92% for 2013, 4.79% for 2012 and 5.20% for 2011. It is the Company's
policy to fund healthcare benefits on a cash basis. Because the plans are
unfunded, there are no plan assets. The following table provides a
reconciliation of the projected benefit obligation at the Company's December
31 measurement date:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Benefit obligation at beginning of year

|

$

|

6,940

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,542

|

  
  
  
Service cost

|

154

|

  

|

|

143

|

  
  
  
Interest cost

|

255

|

  

|

|

295

|

  
  
  
Actuarial (gain) loss

|

(746

|

)

|

|

422

|

  
  
  
Plan participants contributions

|

716

|

  

|

|

673

|

  
  
  
Benefits paid

|

(943

|

)

|

|

(1,135

|

)  
  
Benefit obligation and funded status at end of year

|

$

|

6,376

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,940

|

  
  
  
The amounts recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31 are:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Accrued compensation and employee benefits

|

$

|

442

|

  

|

|

$

|

451

|

  
  
  
Accrued non-pension postretirement benefits

|

5,934

|

  

|

|

6,489

|

  
  
  
Amounts recognized at December 31

|

$

|

6,376

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,940

|

  
  
  
  

The discount rate used to measure the accumulated postretirement benefit
obligation was 4.73% for 2013 and 3.92% for 2012. The Company's discount rate
assumptions for its postretirement benefit plan are based on the average yield
of a hypothetical high quality bond portfolio with maturities that
approximately match the estimated cash flow needs of the plan. Because the
plan requires the Company to establish fixed Company contribution amounts for
retiree healthcare benefits, future healthcare cost trends do not generally
impact the Company's accruals or provisions.

Estimated future benefit payments of postretirement benefits, assuming
increased cost sharing, expected to be paid in each of the next five years
beginning with 2014 are $0.5 million in each year with an aggregate of $2.3
million for the five

  

45

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

years thereafter. These amounts can vary significantly from year to year
because the cost sharing estimates can vary from actual expenses as the
Company is self-insured.

  

Badger Meter Employee Savings and Stock Ownership Plan

In 2010, the Company restructured the outstanding debt of its ESSOP by loaning
the ESSOP $0.5 million to repay a loan to a third party and loaning the ESSOP
an additional $1.0 million to purchase additional shares of the Company's
Common Stock for future 401(k) savings plan matches under a program that will
expire on December 31, 2020. Under this program, the Company agreed to pay the
principal and interest on the new loan amount of $1.5 million. The receivable
from the ESSOP and the related obligation were therefore netted to zero on the
Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2013 and 2012. The terms
of the loan call for equal payments of principal with the final payment due on
December 31, 2020, and prepayments are allowed under the plan terms. At
December 31, 2013, $1.1 million of the loan balance remained.

The Company made principal payments of $154,000, $256,000 and $51,000 in 2013,
2012 and 2011, respectively. The associated commitments released shares of
Common Stock (9,918 shares in 2013 for the 2012 obligation, 16,151 shares in
2012 for the 2011 obligation, and 10,735 shares in 2011 for the 2010
obligation) for allocation to participants in the ESSOP. The ESSOP held
unreleased shares of 83,439, 93,357 and 111,145 as of December 31, 2013, 2012
and 2011, respectively, with a fair value of $4.5 million, $4.4 million and
$3.3 million as of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Unreleased
shares are not considered outstanding for purposes of computing earnings per
share.

The ESSOP includes a voluntary 401(k) savings plan that allows certain
employees to defer up to 20% of their income on a pretax basis subject to
limits on maximum amounts. The Company matches 25% of each employee's
contribution, with the match percentage applying to a maximum of 7% of each
employee's salary. The match is paid using the Company's Common Stock released
through the ESSOP loan payments. For ESSOP shares purchased prior to 1993,
compensation expense is recognized based on the original purchase price of the
shares released and dividends on unreleased shares are charged to compensation
expense. For shares purchased in or after 1993, expense is based on the market
value of the shares on the date released and dividends on unreleased shares
are charged to compensation expense. Compensation expense of $0.3 million was
recognized for the match for each of 2013, 2012 and 2011.

On December 31, 2010, the Company froze the qualified pension plan for its
non-union participants and formed a new defined contribution feature within
the ESSOP plan in which each employee received a similar benefit. On December
31, 2011, the Company froze the qualified pension plan for its union
participants and included them in the same defined contribution feature within
the ESSOP. For 2013, compensation expense under the defined contribution
feature totaled $2.3 million.

  

Note 8 Income Taxes

The Company is subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining the
worldwide provision for income taxes and recording the related deferred tax
assets and liabilities.

Details of earnings before income taxes are as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Domestic

|

$

|

34,687

|

  

|

|

$

|

40,650

|

  

|

|

$

|

23,750

|

  
  
  
Foreign

|

3,322

|

  

|

|

2,821

|

  

|

|

3,599

|

  
  
  
Total

|

$

|

38,009

|

  

|

|

$

|

43,471

|

  

|

|

$

|

27,349

|

  
  
  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

46

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

The provision for income taxes is as follows:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Current:

|  
  
Federal

|

$

|

12,630

|

  

|

|

$

|

13,908

|

  

|

|

$

|

7,111

|

  
  
  
State

|

2,394

|

  

|

|

1,455

|

  

|

|

1,290

|

  
  
  
Foreign

|

802

|

  

|

|

507

|

  

|

|

780

|

  
  
  
Deferred:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Federal

|

(2,174

|

)

|

|

(663

|

)

|

|

(774

|

)  
  
State

|

(228

|

)

|

|

(165

|

)

|

|

(79

|

)  
  
Foreign

|

(32

|

)

|

|

397

|

  

|

|

(140

|

)  
  
Total

|

$

|

13,392

|

  

|

|

$

|

15,439

|

  

|

|

$

|

8,188

|

  
  
  
The provision for income taxes differs from the amount that would be provided
by applying the statutory

U.S. corporate income tax rate in each year due to the following items:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Provision at statutory rate

|

$

|

13,303

|

  

|

|

$

|

15,215

|

  

|

|

$

|

9,572

|

  
  
  
State income taxes, net of federal tax benefit

|

1,408

|

  

|

|

1,018

|

  

|

|

783

|

  
  
  
Foreign income taxes

|

(393

|

)

|

|

(87

|

)

|

|

(621

|

)  
  
Domestic production activities deduction

|

(498

|

)

|

|

(529

|

)

|

|

(255

|

)  
  
Tax audit settlements

|

--

|

  

|

|

(101

|

)

|

|

(1,330

|

)  
  
Other

|

(428

|

)

|

|

(77

|

)

|

|

39

|

  
  
  
Actual provision

|

$

|

13,392

|

  

|

|

$

|

15,439

|

  

|

|

$

|

8,188

|

  
  
  
  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

47

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

  

  

The components of deferred income taxes as of December 31 are as follows:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Deferred tax assets:

|

|

|  
  
Reserve for receivables and inventories

|

$

|

2,850

|

  

|

|

$

|

1,991

|

  
  
  
Accrued compensation

|

1,087

|

  

|

|

876

|

  
  
  
Payables

|

364

|

  

|

|

582

|

  
  
  
Non-pension postretirement benefits

|

2,447

|

  

|

|

2,652

|

  
  
  
Net operating loss and credit carryforwards

|

2,645

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Accrued pension benefits

|

--

|

  

|

|

2,912

|

  
  
  
Accrued employee benefits

|

1,681

|

  

|

|

1,540

|

  
  
  
Other

|

793

|

  

|

|

745

|

  
  
  
Total deferred tax assets

|

11,867

|

  

|

|

11,298

|

  
  
  
|

|

|  
  
Deferred tax liabilities:

|

|

|  
  
Depreciation

|

4,408

|

  

|

|

4,657

|

  
  
  
Amortization

|

12,165

|

  

|

|

11,437

|

  
  
  
Accrued pension benefits

|

236

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Other

|

14

|

  

|

|

--

|

  
  
  
Total deferred tax liabilities

|

16,823

|

  

|

|

16,094

|

  
  
  
Net deferred tax liabilities

|

$

|

(4,956

|

)

|

|

$

|

(4,796

|

)  
  
  

At December 31, 2013, the Company had federal and state net operating loss
carryforwards of $5.9 million, which were acquired in connection with the
Aquacue acquisition. There were no carryforwards at December 31, 2012. The
Company's U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards expire
between 2029 and 2033.

At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company had federal and state general
business credit carryforwards of $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
The Company's U.S. federal and state tax credit carryforwards expire between
2029 and 2033.

  

The Company's federal and state net operating loss and federal and state
credit carryforwards are limited on an annual basis to $0.4 million under
Internal Revenue Code Section 382 and Section 383. The federal and state net
operating loss carryforward must be fully utilized prior to the utilization of
the federal and state credit carryforward.

No provision for federal income taxes was made on the earnings of foreign
subsidiaries that are considered permanently invested or that would be offset
by foreign tax credits upon distribution. Such undistributed earnings at
December 31, 2013 were $19.1 million.

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

48

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

  

  

Changes in the Company's gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits,
excluding interest and penalties, are as follows:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Balance at beginning of year

|

$

|

698

|

  

|

|

$

|

796

|

  
  
  
Increases (decreases) in unrecognized tax benefits as a result of positions
taken during the prior period

|

80

|

  

|

|

(18

|

)  
  
Increases in unrecognized tax benefits as a result of positions taken during
the current period

|

216

|

  

|

|

162

|

  
  
  
Decreases in unrecognized tax benefits relating to settlements with taxing
authorities

|

--

|

  

|

|

(70

|

)  
  
Reductions to unrecognized tax benefits as a result of a lapse of the
applicable statute of limitations

|

(114

|

)

|

|

(172

|

)  
  
Balance at end of year

|

$

|

880

|

  

|

|

$

|

698

|

  
  
  
The Company does not expect a significant increase or decrease to the total
amounts of unrecognized tax benefits during the fiscal year ending December
31, 2014. To the extent these unrecognized tax benefits are ultimately
recognized, they will impact the effective tax rate in a future period,
possibly as early as the fiscal year ending December 31, 2014.

The Company and its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal
jurisdiction, and various states and foreign jurisdictions. With few
exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state and local,
or non-U.S. income tax examinations by tax authorities for years prior to
2009. The Company's policy is to recognize interest related to unrecognized
tax benefits as interest expense and penalties as operating expenses. Accrued
interest was approximately $0.1 million at both December 31, 2013 and 2012,
and there were no penalties accrued in either year.

  

The Company believes that it has appropriate support for the income tax
positions taken and to be taken on its tax returns and that its accruals for
tax liabilities are adequate for all open years based on an assessment of many
factors including past experience and interpretations of tax law applied to
the facts of each matter.

  

Note 9 Long-Term Debt

  

In 2010, the Company restructured the outstanding debt of its ESSOP by loaning
the ESSOP $0.5 million to repay a loan to a third party and loaning the ESSOP
an additional $1.0 million to purchase additional shares of the Company's
Common Stock for future 401(k) savings plan matches under a program that will
expire on December 31, 2020. Under this program, the Company agreed to pay the
principal and interest on the new loan amount of $1.5 million. The receivable
from the ESSOP and the related obligation were therefore netted to zero on the
Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2013 and 2012. The terms
of the loan call for equal payments of principal with the final payment due on
December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2013, $1.1 million of the loan balance
remained.

  

Note 10 Industry Segment and Geographic Areas

  

The Company is an innovator, manufacturer and a marketer of products
incorporating flow measurement and control technologies, which comprise one
reportable segment. The Company manages and evaluates its operations as one
segment primarily due to similarities in the nature of the products,
production processes, customers and methods of distribution.

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

49

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

Information regarding revenues by geographic area is as follows:

  
  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012

|

|

2011  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Revenues:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
United States

|

$

|

290,019

|

  

|

|

$

|

271,045

|

  

|

|

$

|

231,306

|

  
  
  
Foreign:

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Asia

|

8,085

|

  

|

|

10,075

|

  

|

|

2,229

|

  
  
  
Canada

|

8,514

|

  

|

|

8,752

|

  

|

|

3,362

|

  
  
  
Europe

|

15,677

|

  

|

|

16,001

|

  

|

|

12,997

|

  
  
  
Mexico

|

4,226

|

  

|

|

6,636

|

  

|

|

8,178

|

  
  
  
Other

|

7,601

|

  

|

|

7,151

|

  

|

|

4,843

|

  
  
  
Total

|

$

|

334,122

|

  

|

|

$

|

319,660

|

  

|

|

$

|

262,915

|

  
  
  
  

Information regarding assets by geographic area is as follows:  
  
---  
| | | | | | |  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Long-lived assets (all non-current assets):

|

|

|  
  
United States

|

$

|

150,997

|

  

|

|

$

|

133,628

|

  
  
  
Foreign:

|

|

|  
  
Europe

|

17,409

|

  

|

|

15,261

|

  
  
  
Mexico

|

20,489

|

  

|

|

20,190

|

  
  
  
Total

|

$

|

188,895

|

  

|

|

$

|

169,079

|

  
  
  
|

|

|  
  
|

2013

|

|

2012  
  
|

(In thousands)  
  
Total assets:

|

|

|  
  
United States

|

$

|

255,881

|

  

|

|

$

|

236,442

|

  
  
  
Foreign:

|

|

|  
  
Europe

|

36,838

|

  

|

|

31,461

|

  
  
  
Mexico

|

23,339

|

  

|

|

22,550

|

  
  
  
Total

|

$

|

316,058

|

  

|

|

$

|

290,453

|

  
  
  
  

  

50

* * *

  

BADGER METER, INC.

Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (continued)

December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011

  

  

Note 11 Unaudited: Quarterly Results of Operations, Common Stock Price and
Dividends  
  
---  
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  
  
|

Quarter ended  
  
|

March 31

|

|

June 30

|

|

September 30

|

|

December 31  
  
|

(In thousands except per share data)  
  
2013

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Net sales

|

$

|

71,808

|

  

|

|

$

|

88,341

|

  

|

|

$

|

92,963

|

  

|

|

$

|

81,010

|

  
  
  
Gross margin

|

$

|

25,037

|

  

|

|

$

|

29,846

|

  

|

|

$

|

33,103

|

  

|

|

$

|

29,003

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

$

|

2,907

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,281

|

  

|

|

$

|

9,049

|

  

|

|

$

|

6,380

|

  
  
  
Earnings per share:

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Basic

|

$

|

0.21

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.44

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.63

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.44

|

  
  
  
Diluted

|

$

|

0.20

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.44

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.63

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.44

|

  
  
  
Dividends declared

|

$

|

0.17

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.17

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.18

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.18

|

  
  
  
Stock price:

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
High

|

$

|

54.20

|

  

|

|

$

|

54.28

|

  

|

|

$

|

49.96

|

  

|

|

$

|

56.36

|

  
  
  
Low

|

$

|

46.82

|

  

|

|

$

|

41.88

|

  

|

|

$

|

43.96

|

  

|

|

$

|

44.80

|

  
  
  
Quarter-end close

|

$

|

53.52

|

  

|

|

$

|

44.55

|

  

|

|

$

|

46.50

|

  

|

|

$

|

54.50

|

  
  
  
|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
2012

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Net sales

|

$

|

76,233

|

  

|

|

$

|

81,974

|

  

|

|

$

|

87,130

|

  

|

|

$

|

74,323

|

  
  
  
Gross margin

|

$

|

28,864

|

  

|

|

$

|

30,201

|

  

|

|

$

|

34,330

|

  

|

|

$

|

28,851

|

  
  
  
Net earnings

|

$

|

6,249

|

  

|

|

$

|

7,442

|

  

|

|

$

|

8,857

|

  

|

|

$

|

5,484

|

  
  
  
Earnings per share:

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
Basic

|

$

|

0.42

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.52

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.63

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.39

|

  
  
  
Diluted

|

$

|

0.42

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.52

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.62

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.39

|

  
  
  
Dividends declared

|

$

|

0.16

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.16

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.17

|

  

|

|

$

|

0.17

|

  
  
  
Stock price:

|

|

|

|

|

|

|  
  
High

|

$

|

35.05

|

  

|

|

$

|

39.73

|

  

|

|

$

|

39.85

|

  

|

|

$

|

48.60

|

  
  
  
Low

|

$

|

29.30

|

  

|

|

$

|

32.61

|

  

|

|

$

|

32.29

|

  

|

|

$

|

36.25

|

  
  
  
Quarter-end close

|

$

|

33.99

|

  

|

|

$

|

37.55

|

  

|

|

$

|

36.39

|

  

|

|

$

|

47.41

|

  
  
  
The Company's Common Stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the
symbol BMI. Earnings per share are computed independently for each quarter. As
such, the annual per share amount may not equal the sum of the quarterly
amounts due to rounding. The Company currently anticipates continuing to pay
cash dividends. Shareholders of record as of

December 31, 2013 and 2012 totaled 969 and 981, respectively. Voting trusts
and street name shareholders are counted as single shareholders for this
purpose.

  

  

51

* * *

  

ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE

  

None.

  

ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES

  

Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures

  

In accordance with Rule 13a-15(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the
"Exchange Act"), the Company's management evaluated, with the participation of
the Company's Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer and the
Company's Senior Vice President - Finance, Chief Financial Officer and
Treasurer, the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company's
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) under the
Exchange Act) as of the end of the year ended December 31, 2013. Based upon
their evaluation of these disclosure controls and procedures, the Company's
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer and the Company's Senior Vice
President - Finance, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer concluded that, as
of the date of such evaluation, the Company's disclosure controls and
procedures were effective.

  

Changes in Internal Controls over Financial Reporting

  

There was no change in the Company's internal control over financial reporting
that occurred during the quarter ended December 31, 2013 that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company's internal
control over financial reporting.

  

Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting

The report of management required under this Item 9A is contained in Item 8 of
this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading "Management's Annual
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting."

  

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control
over Financial Reporting

  

The attestation report required under this Item 9A is contained in Item 8 of
this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading "Report of Independent
Registered Public Accounting Firm."

  

ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION

  

None.

  

  

52

* * *

  

PART III

  

  

ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

  

Information required by this Item with respect to directors is included under
the headings "Nomination and Election of Directors" and "Section 16(a)
Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance" in the Company's definitive Proxy
Statement relating to the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on April
25, 2014, and is incorporated herein by reference.

  

Information concerning the executive officers of the Company is included in
Part I, Item 1 of this 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading
"Business - Employees."

  

The Company has adopted the Badger Meter, Inc. Code of Conduct for Financial
Executives that applies to the Company's Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer, the Company's Senior Vice President - Finance, Chief
Financial Officer and Treasurer and other persons performing similar
functions. A copy of the Badger Meter, Inc. Code of Conduct for Financial
Executives is posted on the Company's website at www.badgermeter.com. The
Badger Meter, Inc. Code of Conduct for Financial Executives is also available
in print to any shareholder who requests it in writing from the Secretary of
the Company. The Company satisfies the disclosure requirements under Item 5.05
of Form 8-K regarding amendments to, or waivers from, the Badger Meter, Inc.
Code of Conduct for Financial Executives by posting such information on the
Company's website at www.badgermeter.com.

  

The Company is not including the information contained on its website as part
of, or incorporating it by reference into, this 2013 Annual Report on Form
10-K.

  

ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION

  

Information required by this Item is included under the headings "Executive
Compensation" and "Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider
Participation" in the Company's definitive Proxy Statement relating to the
Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on April 25, 2014, and is
incorporated herein by reference; provided, however, that the information
under the subsection "Executive Compensation - Compensation Committee Report"
is not deemed to be "soliciting material" or to be "filed" with the Securities
and Exchange Commission or subject to Regulation 14A or 14C under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or to be the liabilities of Section 18 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and will not be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into any filing under the Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, except to the extent it is specifically incorporated by
reference into such a filing.

  

ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS

  

Information required by this Item is included under the headings "Stock
Ownership of Beneficial Owners Holding More than Five Percent," "Stock
Ownership of Management" and "Equity Compensation Plan Information" in the
Company's definitive Proxy Statement relating to the Annual Meeting of
Shareholders to be held on April 25, 2014, and is incorporated herein by
reference.

  

ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENCE

  

Information required by this Item is included under the headings "Related
Person Transactions" and "Nomination and Election of Directors - Independence,
Committees, Meetings and Attendance" in the Company's definitive Proxy
Statement relating to the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on April
25, 2014, and is incorporated herein by reference.

  

ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES

  

Information required by this Item is included under the heading "Principal
Accounting Firm Fees" in the Company's definitive Proxy Statement relating to
the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on April 25, 2014, and is
incorporated herein by reference.

  

  

53

* * *

  

PART IV

  

  

ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES

  

Documents filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K:

  

|  
---|---  
  
1.

|

Financial Statements. See the financial statements included in Part II, Item 8
"Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this 2013 Annual Report on
Form 10-K, under the headings "Consolidated Balance Sheets," "Consolidated
Statements of Operations," "Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income,"
"Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows" and "Consolidated Statements of
Shareholders' Equity."  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
2.

|

Financial Statement Schedules. Financial statement schedules are omitted
because the information required in these schedules is included in the Notes
to Consolidated Financial Statements.  
  
  

|  
---|---  
  
3.

|

Exhibits. See the Exhibit Index included in this 2013 Annual Report on Form
10-K that is incorporated herein by reference.  
  
  

  

54

* * *

  

SIGNATURES

  

  

Pursuant to the requirements Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on February 20, 2014.

  
  
  
---  
| |  
  
BADGER METER, INC.  
  
|  
  
By:

|

|

/s/ Richard A. Meeusen  
  
|

|

Richard A. Meeusen  
  
|

|

Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer  
  
  

Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated on February 20, 2014.  
  
---  
| |  
  
Name

|

|

Title  
  
|  
  
/s/ Richard A. Meeusen

|

|

Chairman, President and

Chief Executive Officer and

Director (Principal executive officer)  
  
Richard A. Meeusen

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Richard E. Johnson

|

|

Senior Vice President -- Finance,

Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer

(Principal financial officer)  
  
Richard E. Johnson

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Beverly L. P. Smiley

|

|

Vice President -- Controller

(Principal accounting officer)  
  
Beverly L. P. Smiley

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Ronald H. Dix

|

|

Director  
  
Ronald H. Dix

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Thomas J. Fischer

|

|

Director  
  
Thomas J. Fischer

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Gale E. Klappa

|

|

Director  
  
Gale E. Klappa

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Gail A. Lione

|

|

Director  
  
Gail A. Lione

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Andrew J. Policano

|

|

Director  
  
Andrew J. Policano

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Steven J. Smith

|

|

Director  
  
Steven J. Smith

|  
  
|  
  
/s/ Todd J. Teske

|

|

Director  
  
Todd J. Teske

|  
  
|  
  
|

|  
  
|  
  
  

55

* * *

EXHIBIT INDEX

  

  
  
  
---  
| |  
  
EXHIBIT NO.

|

|

EXHIBIT DESCRIPTION  
  
|  
  
(2.0)*

|

|

Acquisition Agreement dated as of December 30, 2011, by and among Racine
Federated, Inc. the Shareholders' Representative (named therein), Badger
Meter, Inc. and RFI Acquisition Corp.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference to Exhibit (2.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated December 30, 2011 (Commission File No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(3)

|

|

Restated Articles of Incorporation (as in effect as of August 8, 2008).  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference to Exhibit (3.2) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 2008 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(3.1)

|

|

Restated By-Laws (as amended and restated as of February 12, 2010).  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference to Exhibit (3.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2009 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(4)

|

|

Rights Agreement, dated February 15, 2008, between Badger Meter, Inc. and
American Stock Transfer &amp; Trust Company.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference to Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Current
Report on Form 8-K, dated February 22, 2008 (Commission File No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(4.1)

|

|

Loan Agreement dated May 23, 2012 between Badger Meter, Inc. and BMO Harris
Bank relating to Badger Meter, Inc.'s revolving credit agreement.

  
  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 2012 (Commission
File No. 001-06706)].

  
  
  
|

|  
  
(4.2)

|

|

First Amendment to Credit Agreement dated May 21, 2013, related to the Loan
Agreement dated May 23, 2012 between Badger Meter, Inc. and BMO Harris Bank NA
for Badger Meter, Inc.'s credit agreement.

  
  
  
|

|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 2013 (Commission
File No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(10.0)**

|

|

Badger Meter, Inc. Employee Savings and Stock Ownership Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form S-8
Registration Statement (Registration No. 33-62241)].  
  
|  
  
(10.1)**

|

|

Badger Meter, Inc. 1997 Stock Option Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form S-8
Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-28617)].  
  
|  
  
(10.2)**

|

|

Badger Meter, Inc. 1999 Stock Option Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form S-8
Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-73228)].  
  
|  
  
(10.3)**

|

|

Badger Meter, Inc. 2003 Stock Option Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form S-8
Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-107850)].  
  
|  
  
(10.4)**

|

|

Form of the Key Executive Employment and Severance Agreements between Badger
Meter, Inc. and the applicable executive officers.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (10.12) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2008 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|

|  
  
  

56

* * *

EXHIBIT INDEX (CONTINUED)

  

  
  
  
---  
| |  
  
EXHIBIT NO.

|

|

EXHIBIT DESCRIPTION  
  
|  
  
(10.5)**

|

|

Amended and Restated Badger Meter, Inc. Executive Supplemental Plan.  
  
|

|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (10.13) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2008 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|

|  
  
(10.6)**

|

|

Amended and Restated Badger Meter, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (10.14) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2008 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(10.7)**

|

|

Amended and Restated Deferred Compensation Plan for Certain Directors.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (10.15) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2008 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(10.8)**

|

|

Amended and Restated Executive Supplemental Plan II.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (10.16) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2008 (Commission File
No. 001-06706)].  
  
|  
  
(10.9)**

|

|

Badger Meter, Inc. 2011 Omnibus Incentive Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Exhibit (4.1) to Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form S-8
Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-173966)].  
  
|  
  
(10.10)**

|

|

Form of Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement under Badger Meter, Inc. 2011
Omnibus Incentive Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form 8-K dated April 29,
2011 (Commission No. 001-06760)].  
  
|  
  
(10.11)**

|

|

Form of Restricted Stock Award Agreement under Badger Meter, Inc. 2011 Omnibus
Incentive Plan.  
  
|  
  
|

|

[Incorporated by reference from Badger Meter, Inc.'s Form 8-K dated April 29,
2011 (Commission No. 001-06760)].  
  
|  
  
(21)

|

|

Subsidiaries of the Registrant.  
  
|

|  
  
(23)

|

|

Consent of Ernst &amp; Young LLP.  
  
|

|  
  
(31.1)

|

|

Certification by the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.  
  
|

|  
  
(31.2)

|

|

Certification by the Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.  
  
|

|  
  
(32)

|

|

Certification of Periodic Financial Report by the Chief Executive Officer and
Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002.  
  
|

|  
  
(99)

|

|

Definitive Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held
April 25, 2014. To be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission under
Regulation 14A within 120 days after the end of the Registrant's fiscal year.
With the exception of the information incorporated by reference into Items 10,
11, 12, 13 and 14 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the definitive Proxy
Statement is not deemed filed as part of this report.  
  
|

|  
  
(101)

|

|

The following materials from the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2013 formatted in Extensible Business Reporting
Language (XBRL): (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets, (ii) the Consolidated
Statements of Operations, (iii) the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive
Income, (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, (v) the Consolidated
Statements of Shareholders' Equity, (vi) Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements, tagged as blocks of text and (vii) document and entity
information.  
  
  
  
  
---  
|  
  
*

|

The disclosure schedules and exhibits to the Acquisition Agreement are not
being filed herewith. Badger Meter, Inc. agrees to furnish supplementally a
copy of any such schedules and exhibits to the Securities and Exchange
Commission upon request.  
  
---  
|  
  
**

|

A management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.  
  
  

  

57

